CrateDB
Copyright 2013-2018 Crate.IO GmbH ("Crate")


Licensed to Crate.IO GmbH (referred to in this notice as "Crate") under one or
more contributor license agreements.

Different parts of CrateDB are available under different licences.

Unless otherwise stated, every component of CrateDB is licensed under the
Apache License, Version 2.0.

CrateDB also includes enterprise features. These features are marked in the
documentation and in their respective source files, and are not licensed under
the Apache License. To use these components, you must purchase a commercial
licence agreement with Crate.

To enable or use any of the enterprise features, Crate must have given you
permission to enable and use the Enterprise Edition of CrateDB and you must
have a valid Enterprise or Subscription Agreement with Crate. If you enable or
use features that are part of the Enterprise Edition, you represent and warrant
that you have a valid Enterprise or Subscription Agreement with Crate. Your use
of features of the Enterprise Edition is governed by the terms and conditions
of your Enterprise or Subscription Agreement with Crate.

Third-party components bundled with the CrateDB source code are listed in the
LICENSE file along with their respective licenses. Any additional mandatory
notices pertaining to those dependencies will be reproduced in this file.

Crate provides pre-built releases for convenience, also known as convenience
releases. Building CrateDB from source pulls in a number of additional
third-party dependencies. Hence, convenience releases will contain a mix of
CrateDB source code and third-party build-time dependencies not listed in the
LICENSE file or in this file.

Crate is committed to only using permissively licensed third-party code.
However, for the time being, if you make use of convenience releases, it is
your responsibility to check the licensing status of the bundled third-party
build-time dependencies.


================================================================================

This product includes software developed by The Apache Software
Foundation (http://www.apache.org/).
