.. highlight:: psql
.. _sql_reference_select:

==========
``SELECT``
==========

Retrieve rows from a table.

Synopsis
========

::

    SELECT [ ALL | DISTINCT ] * | expression [ [ AS ] output_name ] [, ...]
      [ FROM relation ]
      [ WHERE condition ]
      [ GROUP BY expression [, ...] [HAVING condition] ]
      [ ORDER BY expression [ ASC | DESC ] [ NULLS { FIRST | LAST } ] [, ...] ]
      [ LIMIT num_results ]
      [ OFFSET start ]

where ``relation`` is::

    table_reference | joined_relation | table_function | sub_select

Description
===========

SELECT retrieves rows from a table. The general processing of SELECT is as
follows:

- The FROM item points to the table where the data should be retrieved from. If
  no FROM item is specified, the query is executed against a virtual table with
  no columns.

- If the WHERE clause is specified, all rows that do not satisfy the condition
  are eliminated from the output. (See WHERE Clause below.)

- If the GROUP BY clause is specified, the output is combined into groups of
  rows that match on one or more values.

- The actual output rows are computed using the SELECT output expressions for
  each selected row or row group.

- If the ORDER BY clause is specified, the returned rows are sorted in the
  specified order. If ORDER BY is not given, the rows are returned in whatever
  order the system finds fastest to produce.

- If DISTINCT is specified, one unique row is kept. All other duplicate rows
  are removed from the result set.

- If the LIMIT or OFFSET clause is specified, the SELECT statement only returns
  a subset of the result rows.

Parameters
==========

``SELECT`` List
---------------

The SELECT list specifies expressions that form the output rows of the SELECT
statement. The expressions can (and usually do) refer to columns computed in
the FROM clause.

::

    SELECT [ ALL | DISTINCT ] * | expression [ [ AS ] output_name ] [, ...]

Just as in a table, every output column of a SELECT has a name. In a simple
SELECT this name is just used to label the column for display. To specify the
name to use for an output column, write AS ``output_name`` after the column's
``expression``. (You can omit AS, but only if the desired output name does not
match any reserved keyword. For protection against possible future keyword
additions, it is recommended that you always either write AS or double-quote
the output name.) If you do not specify a column name, a name is chosen
automatically by CrateDB. If the column's expression is a simple column
reference then the chosen name is the same as that column's name. In more
complex cases a function or type name may be used, or the system may fall back
on a generated name.

An output column's name can be used to refer to the column's value in ORDER BY
and GROUP BY clauses, but not in the WHERE clause; there you must write out the
expression instead.

Instead of an expression, ``*`` can be written in the output list as a
shorthand for all the columns of the selected rows. Also, you can write
table_name.* as a shorthand for the columns coming from just that table. In
these cases it is not possible to specify new names with AS; the output column
names will be the same as the table columns' names.

``FROM`` Clause
---------------

The FROM clause specifies the source relation for the SELECT::

    FROM relation

The relation can be any of the following relations.

Table Reference
...............

A ``table_reference`` is a table ident with an optional table alias::

    table_ident [ [AS] table_alias ]

:table_ident: The name (optionally schema-qualified) of an existing table.

.. _sql_reference_table_alias:

:table_alias: A substitute name for the FROM item containing the alias. An
              alias is used for brevity. When an alias is provided, it
              completely hides the actual name of the table. For example given
              ``FROM foo AS f``, the remainder of the SELECT must refer to this
              'FROM' item as 'f' not 'foo'.

.. _sql_reference_joined_tables:

Joined Relation
...............

A ``joined_relation`` is a relation which joins two relations together. See
:ref:`sql_dql_joins` ::

    relation { , | join_type JOIN } relation [ ON join_condition ]

:join_type: LEFT [OUTER], RIGHT [OUTER], FULL [OUTER], CROSS or INNER.

:join_condition: An expression which specifies which rows in a join are
                 considered a match. The join_condition is not applicable for
                 joins of type CROSS and must have a returning value of type
                 ``boolean``.

Table Function
..............

``table_function`` is a function that produces a set of rows and has columns.

::

    function_call

:function_call: The call declaration of the function. Usually in the form of
                `` function_name ( [ args ] )``.

                Depending on the function the parenthesis and arguments are
                either optional or required.

Available functions are documented in the :doc:`table functions
</sql/table_functions>` section.

.. _sql_reference_subselect:

Sub Select
..........

A ``sub_select`` is another ``SELECT`` statement surrounded by parentheses with
an alias:

::

    ( select_stmt ) [ AS ] alias

The sub-select behaves like a temporary table that is evaluated at runtime. The
clauses of the surrounding ``SELECT`` statements are applied on the result of
the inner ``SELECT`` statement.

:select_stmt: A :ref:`SELECT <sql_reference_select>` statement.

:alias: An :ref:`alias <sql_reference_table_alias>` for the sub select.

``WHERE`` Clause
----------------

The optional WHERE clause defines the condition to be met for a row to be
returned::

    WHERE condition

:condition: a where condition is any expression that evaluates to a result of
            type boolean. Any row that does not satisfy this condition will be
            eliminated from the output. A row satisfies the condition if it
            returns true when the actual row values are substituted for any
            variable references.

.. _sql_reference_group_by:

``GROUP BY`` Clause
-------------------

The optional GROUP BY clause will condense into a single row all selected rows
that share the same values for the grouped expressions.

Aggregate expressions, if any are used, are computed across all rows making up
each group, producing a separate value for each group.

::

    GROUP BY expression [, ...] [HAVING condition]

:expression: An arbitrary expression formed from column references of the
             queried relation that are also present in the result column list.
             Numeric literals are interpreted as ordinals referencing an output
             column from the select list.

             It can also reference output columns by name.

             In case of ambiguity, a GROUP BY name will be interpreted as a
             name of a column from the queried relation rather than an output
             column name.

.. _sql_reference_having:

``HAVING`` Clause
.................

The optional HAVING clause defines the condition to be met for values whitin a
resulting row of a group by clause.

:condition: a having condition is any expression that evaluates to a result of
            type boolean. Every row for which the condition is not satisfied
            will be eliminated from the output.

.. NOTE::

   When GROUP BY is present, it is not valid for the SELECT list expressions to
   refer to ungrouped columns except within aggregate functions, since there
   would otherwise be more than one possible value to return for an ungrouped
   column.

.. NOTE::

   Grouping can only be applied on indexed fields. For more information, please
   refer to :ref:`sql_ddl_index_off`.

.. _sql_reference_order_by:

``ORDER BY`` Clause
-------------------

The ORDER BY clause causes the result rows to be sorted according to the
specified expression(s).

::

    ORDER BY expression [ ASC | DESC ] [ NULLS { FIRST | LAST } ] [, ...]

:expression: can be the name or ordinal number of an output column, or it can
             be an arbitrary expression formed from input-column values.

The optional keyword ASC (ascending) or DESC (descending) after any expression
allows to define the direction in which values have are sorted. The default is
ascending.

If NULLS FIRST is specified, null values sort before non null values. If NULLS
LAST is specified null values sort after non null values.  If neither is
specified nulls are considered larger than any value. That means the default
for ASC is NULLS LAST and the default for DESC is NULLS FIRST.

.. NOTE::

   If two rows are equal according to the leftmost expression, they are
   compared according to the next expression and so on. If they are equal
   according to all specified expressions, they are returned in an
   implementation-dependent order.

.. NOTE::

   Sorting can only be applied on indexed fields. For more information, please
   refer to :ref:`sql_ddl_index_off`.

Character-string data is sorted by its UTF-8 representation.

.. NOTE::

  Sorting on :ref:`geo_point_data_type`, :ref:`geo_shape_data_type`,
  :ref:`data-type-array`, and :ref:`object_data_type` is not supported.

``LIMIT`` Clause
----------------

The optional LIMIT Clause allows to limit the number or retured result rows::

    LIMIT num_results

:num_results: specifies the maximum number of result rows to return.

              If a client using the `HTTP` or `Transport` protocol is used a
              default limit of 10000 is implicitly added.

.. NOTE::

   It is possible for repeated executions of the same LIMIT query to return
   different subsets of the rows of a table, if there is not an ORDER BY to
   enforce selection of a deterministic subset.

``OFFSET`` Clause
-----------------

The optional OFFSET Clause allows to skip result rows at the beginning::

    OFFSET start

:start: specifies the number of rows to skip before starting to return rows.
