================
Multi Zone Setup
================

If possible, we recommend running all Crate nodes of a cluster inside
the same physical space (e.g. data center) to minimize network latency
and maximize speed between the nodes. These factors can have a
significant impact on the performance of Crate clusters.

This is because replicas are written *synchronously* and making a write
task wait for the replicas to write somewhere in a data center hundreds
of miles away can lead to noticeable latency and cause the cluster to
slow down.

In certain scenarios it may be necessary to run a cluster across
multiple data centers or availability zones. We'll call these **zones**
from now on.

For a multi zone setup, Crate clusters need to fulfill the following 3
requirements:

Requirements
------------

1. When inserting data, it should be replicated in a way so that at
   least one full replica is present inside each zone.
2. If a zone becomes unavailable, all data still needs to be fully
   available.
3. When querying data, all data should only be collected from shards
   that are inside the same zone as the initial request.

To achieve these requirements, make use of **shard allocation
awareness**. If you are new to setting up a multi-node Crate cluster you
should read our `multi node setup </docs/scale/multi_node_setup>`__
guide first.

Assigning Tags
--------------

First, assign a tag containing the zone to the cluster nodes. This
enables shard allocation awareness.

It's possible to assign arbitrary tags to nodes using the *crate.yaml*
settings file or the ``-C`` option on startup. `Read our in-depth
guide </docs/reference/configuration.html>`__ for more details on Crate
configuration options.

In *crate.yaml* a zone tag looks like:

.. code-block:: yaml

    node.zone: us-east-1

The node is tagged with a ``zone`` of the value ``us-east-1``, an
availability zone of a cloud computing provider.

.. NOTE::

   These tags and settings can't be changed at runtime and need to be
   set on startup.

Allocation Awareness
--------------------

Now tags can be set as attributes for the shard allocation awareness. We
use the tag ``zone`` that we just assigned to the node as an attribute:

.. code-block:: yaml

    cluster.routing.allocation.awareness.attributes: zone

This means that Crate will try to allocate shards and their replicas
according to the ``zone`` tags, so that a shard and its replica are not
on a node with the same ``zone`` value.

Let's add a second and a third node in a different zone (``us-west-1``)
and tag them accordingly.

.. code-block:: yaml

    node.zone: us-west-1
    cluster.routing.allocation.awareness.attributes: zone

When the cluster is started, we will create a table with 6 shards and 1
replica. The 6 shards will be distributed evenly across the nodes (2
shards on each node) and the replicas allocated on nodes with a
different ``zone`` value to its primary shard.

If that isn't possible (e.g. ``num replicas > num zones - 1``) Crate
will still allocate the replicas on nodes with the same ``zone`` value
to avoid unassigned shards.

.. NOTE::

   Allocation awareness only means that Crate tries to conform to the
   awareness attributes, to avoid such allocations, force the awareness.

Force Awareness
---------------

To fulfill the 3rd requirement you need to ensure that when running a
query on a node with a certain ``zone`` value it only executes the
request on shards allocated on nodes with the same ``zone`` value.

This means you need to know the different ``zone`` attribute values to
force awareness on nodes.

You can force awareness on certain attributes, for example, the
``zone``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    cluster.routing.allocation.awareness.force.zone.values: us-east-1,us-west-1

When set, no more replicas than needed are allocated on a specific group
of nodes.

.. TODO: turn this into a side bar

.. TIP::

   You have 2 nodes with ``zone`` set to ``us-east-1`` and create a table with
   8 shards and 1 replica. 8 primary shards will be allocated and the 8 replica
   shards left unassigned. Only when you add a new node with ``zone`` set to
   ``us-west-1`` will the replica shards be allocated.

By using these settings and their mechanisms correctly, you should be
able to setup a cluster that spans across multiple zones and fulfills
the 3 requirements above, but be aware of the drawbacks such a setup can
have.
