.. highlight:: psql
.. _ref-create-table:

================
``CREATE TABLE``
================

Define a new table.

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Synopsis
========

::

    CREATE TABLE [ IF NOT EXISTS ] table_ident ( [
        {
            base_column_definition
          | generated_column_definition
          | table_constraint
        }
        [, ... ] ]
    )
    [ PARTITIONED BY (column_name [, ...] ) ]
    [ CLUSTERED [ BY (routing_column) ] INTO num_shards SHARDS ]
    [ WITH ( table_parameter [= value] [, ... ] ) ]

where ``base_column_definition``::

    column_name data_type [ column_constraint [ ... ] ]  [ storage_options ]

where ``generated_column_definition`` is::

    column_name [ data_type GENERATED ALWAYS ]
    AS [ ( ] generation_expression [ ) ]
    [ column_constraint [ ... ] ]

where ``column_constraint`` is::

    { PRIMARY KEY |
      NOT NULL |
      INDEX { OFF | USING { PLAIN |
                            FULLTEXT [ WITH ( analyzer = analyzer_name ) ]  }
    }

where ``storage_options`` is::

    STORAGE WITH ( option = value_expression [, ... ] )

and ``table_constraint`` is::

    { PRIMARY KEY ( column_name [, ... ] ) |
      INDEX index_name USING FULLTEXT ( column_name [, ... ] )
           [ WITH ( analyzer = analyzer_name ) ]
    }

Description
===========

CREATE TABLE will create a new, initially empty table.

If the table_ident does not contain a schema, the table is created in the
``doc`` schema. Otherwise it is created in the given schema, which is
implicitly created, if it didn't exist yet.

A table consists of one or more *base columns* and any number of *generated
columns* and/or *table_constraints*.

The optional constraint clauses specify constraints (tests) that new or updated
rows must satisfy for an insert or update operation to succeed. A constraint is
an SQL object that helps define the set of valid values in the table in various
ways.

There are two ways to define constraints: table constraints and column
constraints. A column constraint is defined as part of a column definition. A
table constraint definition is not tied to a particular column, and it can
encompass more than one column. Every column constraint can also be written as
a table constraint; a column constraint is only a notational convenience for
use when the constraint only affects one column.

Table Elements
--------------

.. _ref-base-columns:

Base Columns
............

A base column is a persistent column in the table metadata. In relational terms
it is an attribute of the tuple of the table-relation. It has a name, a type
and optional constraints.

Base columns are readable and writable (if the table itself is writable).
Values for base columns are given in DML statements explicitly or omitted, in
which case their value is null.

.. _ref-generated-columns:

Generated Columns
.................

A generated column is a persistent column that is generated by applying a
``generation_expression`` which is evaluated in the context of the current row.
So the value of a generated column is usually generated by applying a function
or transformation to the values of other base columns in the same row.

It is not possible to reference other generated columns from within the
``generation_expression``.

Generated columns are read-only.

A generated column is not virtual. It is stored in the table like a base column
is. The origin of its value is what makes it different.

Table Constraints
.................

Table constraints are constraints that are applied to more than one column or
to the table as a whole.

For further details see :ref:`table_constraints`.

Column Constraints
..................

Column constraints are constraints that are applied on each column of the table
separately.

For further details see :ref:`column_constraints`.

Storage options
...............

Storage options can be applied on each column of the table separately.

For further details and available options see :ref:`ddl-storage`.

Parameters
==========

:table_ident:
  The name (optionally schema-qualified) of the table to be created.

:column_name:
  The name of a column to be created in the new table.

:data_type:
  The data type of the column. This can include array and object specifiers. For
  more information on the data types supported by CrateDB see :ref:`data-types`.

:generation_expression:
  An expression (usually a function call) that is applied in the context
  of the current row. As such it can reference other base columns of the
  table. Referencing other generated columns (including itself) is not
  supported. The generation expression is evaluated each time a row is
  inserted or the referenced base columns are updated.

``IF NOT EXISTS``
=================

If the optional IF NOT EXISTS clause is used this statement won't do anything
if the table exists already.

.. _ref_clustered_clause:

``CLUSTERED``
=============

The optional CLUSTERED clause specifies how a table should be distributed
accross a cluster.

:num_shards:
  Specifies the number of shards a table is stored in. Must be greater
  than 0. If not provided the number of shards is calculated based on
  the number of currently active data nodes with the following formula::

      num_shards = max(4, num_data_nodes * 2)

  .. NOTE::

     The minimum value of ``num_shards`` is set to ``4``. This means if the
     calculation of ``num_shards`` does not exceeds its minimum it applies the
     minimum value to each table or partition as default.

:routing_column:
  Allows to explicitly specify a column or field on which basis rows are
  sharded. All rows having the same value in ``routing_column`` are
  stored in the same shard. The default is the primary key if specified,
  otherwise the internal ``_id`` column.

.. _partitioned_by_clause:

``PARTITIONED BY``
==================

The PARTITIONED clause splits the created table into separate partitions for
every distinct combination of values in the listed columns.

::

    [ PARTITIONED BY ( column_name [ , ... ] ) ]

:column_name:
  A column from the table definition this table gets partitioned by.

Several restrictions apply to columns that can be used here:

* columns may not be part of :ref:`ref_clustered_clause`.
* columns must have a :ref:`primitive type <sql_ddl_datatypes_primitives>`.
* columns may not be inside an object array.
* columns may not be indexed with a :ref:`sql_ddl_index_fulltext`.
* if the table has a :ref:`primary_key_constraint` the columns in PARTITIONED
  clause have to be part of it

.. NOTE::

   Columns referenced in the PARTITIONED clause cannot be altered by an
   ``UPDATE`` statement.

.. _with_clause:

``WITH``
--------

The optional WITH clause can specify parameters for tables.

::

    [ WITH ( table_parameter [= value] [, ... ] ) ]

:table_parameter:
  Specifies an optional parameter for the table.

Available parameters are:

.. _number_of_replicas:

``number_of_replicas``
......................

Specifies the number or range of replicas each shard of a table should have for
normal operation, the default is to have ``0-1`` replica.

The number of replicas is defined like this::

    min_replicas [ - [ max_replicas ] ]

:min_replicas:
  The minimum number of replicas required.

:max_replicas:
  The maximum number of replicas.

  The actual maximum number of replicas is max(num_replicas, N-1), where
  N is the number of data nodes in the cluster. If ``max_replicas`` is
  the string ``all`` then it will always be N.

For further details and examples see :ref:`replication`.

.. _sql_ref_refresh_interval:

``refresh_interval``
....................

Specifies the refresh interval of a shard in milliseconds. The default is set
to 1000 milliseconds.

:value:
  The refresh interval in milliseconds. A value of smaller or equal than
  0 turns off the automatic refresh. A value of greater than 0 schedules
  a periodic refresh of the table.

.. NOTE::

   A ``refresh_interval`` of 0 does not guarantee that new writes are *NOT*
   visible to subsequent reads. Only the periodic refresh is disabled. There
   are other internal factors that might trigger a refresh.

For further details see :ref:`refresh_data` or :ref:`sql_ref_refresh`.

.. _sql_ref_write_wait_for_active_shards:

``write.wait_for_active_shards``
................................

Specifies the number of shard copies that need to be active for the write
operation to proceed. If less shards are active the operation will wait for 30s
for them to become active or timeout.

The number of shard copies is defined like this::

    number_of_shard_copies = (1 + number_of_replicas)

:value:
  The number of active shard copies to wait for or ``all``. The default
  value is set to ``all`` which will cause write operations to wait for
  the primary and all replica shards to be active.

.. _table-settings-blocks.read_only:

``blocks.read_only``
....................

Allows to have a read only table.

:value:
  Table is read only if value set to ``true``. Allows writes and table
  settings changes if set to ``false``.

.. _table-settings-blocks.read_only_allow_delete:

``blocks.read_only_allow_delete``
.................................

Allows to have a read only table that additionally can be deleted.

:value:
  Table is read only and can be deleted if value set to ``true``. Allows writes
  and table settings changes if set to ``false``.
  When a disk on a node exceeds the
  ``cluster.routing.allocation.disk.watermark.flood_stage`` threshold, this
  block is applied (set to ``true``) to all tables on that affected node. Once
  you've freed disk space again and the threshold is undershot, you need to set
  the ``blocks.read_only_allow_delete`` table setting to ``false``.

``blocks.read``
...............

``disable``/``enable`` all the read operations

:value:
  Set to ``true`` to disable all read operations for a table, otherwise
  set ``false``.

``blocks.write``
................

``disable``/``enable`` all the write operations

:value:
  Set to ``true`` to disable all write operations and table settings
  modifications, otherwise set ``false``.

``blocks.metadata``
...................

``disable``/``enable`` the table settings modifications.

:values:
  Disables the table settings modifications if set to ``true``, if set
  to ``false`` — table settings modifications are enabled.

``mapping.total_fields.limit``
................................

Sets the maximum number of columns that is allowed for a table. Default is ``1000``.

:value:
  Maximum amount of fields in the Lucene index mapping. This includes
  both the user facing mapping (columns) and internal fields.

``translog.flush_threshold_size``
.................................

Sets size of transaction log prior to flushing.

:value:
  Size (bytes) of translog.

``translog.disable_flush``
..........................

``enable``/``disable`` flushing.

:value:
  Set ``true`` to disable flushing, otherwise set to ``false``.

.. CAUTION::

   It is recommended to use ``disable_flush`` only for short periods of time.

``translog.interval``
.....................

Sets frequency of flush necessity check.

:value:
  Frequency in milliseconds.

.. _translog_sync_interval:

``translog.sync_interval``
..........................

How often the translog is fsynced to disk. Defaults to 5s.
When setting this interval, please keep in mind that changes logged
during this interval and not synced to disk may get lost in case of a
failure. This setting only takes effect if :ref:`translog.durability
<translog_durability>` is set to ``ASYNC``.

:value:
  Interval in milliseconds.

.. _translog_durability:

``translog.durability``
.......................

If set to ``ASYNC`` the translog gets flushed to disk in the background
every :ref:`translog.sync_interval <translog_sync_interval>`. If set to
``REQUEST`` the flush happens after every operation.

:value:
  ``REQUEST`` (default), ``ASYNC``

``allocation.total_shards_per_node``
....................................

Controls the total number of shards (replicas and primaries) allowed to be
allocated on a single node. Defaults to unbounded (-1).

:value:
  Number of shards per node.

``allocation.enable``
.....................

Controls shard allocation for a specific table. Can be set to:

:all:
  Allows shard allocation for all shards. (Default)

:primaries:
  Allows shard allocation only for primary shards.

:new_primaries:
  Allows shard allocation only for primary shards for new tables.

:none:
  No shard allocation allowed.

.. _allocation_max_retries:

``allocation.max_retries``
..........................

Defines the number of attempts to allocate a shard before giving up and leaving
the shard unallocated.

:value:
  Number of retries to allocate a shard. Defaults to 5.

``warming.enable``
..................

``disable``/``enable`` table warming.

Table warming allows to run registered queries to warm up the table before it
is available.

Enabled by default.

:value:
  `true`` to enable warming up, otherwise ``false``

``unassigned.node_left.delayed_timeout``
........................................

Delay the allocation of replica shards which have become unassigned because a
node has left. It defaults to ``1m`` to give a node time to restart
completely (which can take some time when the node has lots of shards).
Setting the timeout to ``0`` will start allocation immediately. This setting
can be changed on runtime in order to increase/decrease the delayed
allocation if needed.

.. _sql_ref_column_policy:

``column_policy``
.................

Specifies the column policy of the table. The default column policy is
``dynamic``.

The column policy is defined like this::

    WITH ( column_policy = {'dynamic' | 'strict'} )

:strict:
  Rejecting any column on insert, update or copy from which is not
  defined in the schema

:dynamic:
  New columns can be added using insert, update or copy from. New
  columns added to ``dynamic`` tables are, once added, usable as usual
  columns. One can retrieve them, sort by them and use them in where
  clauses.

For futher details and examples see :ref:`column_policy` or :ref:`config`.

``max_ngram_diff``
..................

Specifies the maximum difference between max_ngram and min_ngram when using
the NGramTokenizer or the NGramTokenFilter. The default is 1.

``max_shingle_diff``
....................

Specifies the maximum difference between min_shingle_size and max_shingle_size
when using the ShingleTokenFilter. The default is 3.
