.. _version_1.0.4:

=============
Version 1.0.4
=============

Released on 2017/02/24.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 0.57.0 or higher
    before you upgrade to 1.0.4.

    If you want to perform a `rolling upgrade`_, your current CrateDB version
    number must be :ref:`version_1.0.0` or higher. If you want to upgrade from a
    version prior to this, the upgrade will introduce all of the breaking
    changes listed for :ref:`version_1.0.0`, and will require a `full restart
    upgrade`_.

.. WARNING::

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/rolling-upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/full-restart-upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Changelog
=========

Changes
-------

- Removed limitation which didn't allow ordering on :ref:`partition columns
  <gloss-partition-column>` in a ``GROUP BY`` query.

- Updated crate-admin to 1.0.5 which includes the following change:

  - Fixed a console results issue that caused the results table not to be
    displayed after horizontal scrolling.

  - Fixed an issue that caused the Admin UI to load only one plugin.

  - Display warning in the console view when the query result contains an
    unsafe integer.

  - Relocated the help resources section to be underneath the tweet import
    tutorial.

  - Show loading indicator when ``Execute Query`` is in progress.

Fixes
-----

- Fixed an issue which caused restoring a whole partitioned table from a
  snapshot to fail.

- Fixed the low/high disk-based :ref:`shard allocation
  <gloss-shard-allocation>` watermark settings. When a percentage value is
  provided for either of settings, it won't be converted to an absolute byte
  value.

- Index columns based on string arrays are correctly populated with values.

- Fixed :ref:`evaluation <gloss-evaluation>` on ``UPDATE`` of generated
  columns without referenced columns, e.g., generated columns with a
  ``CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`` :ref:`expression <gloss-expression>`.

- Fixed global aggregations on JOINs with 3 or more tables.
