.. _version_2.0.0:

=============
Version 2.0.0
=============

Released on 2017/05/16.

.. WARNING::

    CrateDB 2.x versions prior 2.0.4 (including this version) contain a
    critical bug which leads to deletion of blob data upon node shutdown. It is
    recommended to not install those versions.

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Changelog
=========


Breaking Changes
----------------

 - To accommodate :ref:`user-defined functions <user-defined-functions>`, some
   new reserved keywords have been added to the CrateDB SQL dialect:
   ``RETURNS``, ``CALLED``, ``REPLACE``, ``FUNCTION``, ``LANGUAGE``, ``INPUT``

 - The ``license.enterprise`` setting is set to ``true`` by default. This
   enables the CrateDB Enterprise Edition.

   Enabling this setting requires a valid enterprise license for production
   use.

   If you disable this setting, CrateDB will run with the standard feature set.

 - All custom ``node.*`` style attributes must now be written as
   ``node.attr.*`` to distinguish them from attributes that CrateDB uses
   internally. Consult the :ref:`node attribute <conf-node-attributes>` docs
   for information.

 - The ``node.client`` setting has been removed.

 - The default value of the ``node.attr.max_local_storage_nodes`` node setting
   has been changed to ``1`` to prevent running multiple nodes on the same data
   path by default.

   Previous versions of CrateDB defaulted to allowing up to 50 nodes running on
   the same data path. This was confusing where users accidentally started
   multiple nodes and ended up thinking they have lost data because the second
   node will start with an empty directory.

   Running multiple nodes on the same data path tends to be an exception, so
   this is a safer default.

 - Parsing support of time values has been changed:

   - The unit ``w`` representing weeks is no longer supported.

   - Fractional time values (e.g. ``0.5s``) are no longer supported. For
     example, this means when setting timeouts, ``0.5s`` will be rejected and
     should instead be input as ``500ms``.

 - The already unused ``path.work`` node setting has been removed.

 - The node setting ``bootstrap.mlockall`` has been renamed to
   ``bootstrap.memory_lock``.

 - The ``keyword_repeat`` and ``type_as_payload`` built-in token filter have
   been removed.

 - The ``classic`` built-in analyzer has been removed.

 - The shard balance related cluster settings
   ``cluster.routing.allocation.balance.primary`` and
   ``cluster.routing.allocation.balance.replica`` have been removed.

 - Some ``recovery`` related cluster settings have been removed or replaced:

   - The ``indices.recovery.concurrent_streams`` cluster setting is now
     superseded by ``cluster.routing.allocation.node_concurrent_recoveries``.

   - The ``indices.recovery.activity_timeout`` cluster setting have been
     renamed to ``indices.recovery.recovery_activity_timeout``.

   - Following ``recovery`` cluster settings have been removed:

     - ``indices.recovery.file_chunk_size``

     - ``indices.recovery.translog_ops``

     - ``indices.recovery.translog_size``

     - ``indices.recovery.compress``

 - Logging is now configured by ``log4j2.properties`` instead of
   ``logging.yml``.

 - The plugin interface has changed, injecting classes on ``shard`` or
   ``index`` levels is no longer supported.

 - It's no longer possible to run CrateDB as the unix ``root`` user.

 - Some translog related table settings have been removed or replaced:

   - The ``index.translog.interval``, ``translog.disable_flush`` and
     ``translog.flush_threshold_period`` table settings have been removed.

   - The ``index.translog.sync_interval`` table setting doesn't accept a value
     less than ``100ms`` which prevents fsyncing too often if async durability
     is enabled. The special value ``0`` is no longer supported.

   - The ``index.translog.flush_threshold_ops`` table setting is not supported
     anymore. In order to control flushes based on the transaction log growth
     use ``index.translog.flush_threshold_size`` instead.

 - The ``COPY FROM`` statement now requires column names to be quoted in the
   JSON file being imported.

 - Queries on columns with ``INDEX OFF`` will now fail instead of always
   resulting in an empty result.

 - Configuration support using system properties has been dropped.

 - It's no longer possible to use ``Hadoop 1.x`` as a ``repository`` for
   snapshots.

 - Changed default bind and publish address from ``0.0.0.0`` to the system
   ``loopback`` addresses which will result in CrateDB listening only to local
   ports.

 - The ``discovery.ec2.ping_timeout`` setting has been removed and the
   ``discovery.zen.ping_timeout`` setting is now also used for EC2 discovery.

 - The ``monitor.jvm.gc.[old|young].[debug|info|warn]`` settings used to
   configure logging of garbage collection have been renamed (adding
   ``collector``) to
   ``monitor.jvm.gc.collector.[old|young].[debug|info|warn]``.

 - Recovery timeout settings changes:

     - ``indices.recovery.retry_internal_action_timeout`` has been renamed to
       ``indices.recovery.internal_action_timeout``

     - ``indices.recovery.retry_internal_long_action_timeout`` has been renamed
       to ``indices.recovery.internal_action_long_timeout``

     - ``indices.recovery.retry_activity_timeout`` has been renamed to
       ``indices.recovery.recovery_activity_timeout``

 - Thread pool settings prefix have been changed from ``threadpool`` to
   ``thread_pool``. E.g.: ``thread_pool.<name>.type``.

 - The ``cluster name`` is not part of the effective path where data is stored
   anymore.

 - The blobs data directory layout has changed.


Changes
-------

 - Extended the :ref:`subselect <sql-select-sub-select>` support.

 - Added support for :ref:`host based authentication <admin_hba>` (HBA).

 - Added support for renaming tables using the ``ALTER ... RENAME TO ...``
   statement.

 - Added support for ``CREATE USER`` and ``DROP USER``.

 - Added support for opening and closing a table or single partition.

 - Information on the state of tables/partitions is now exposed by a new column
   ``closed`` on the ``information_schema.tables`` and
   ``information_schema.table_partitions`` tables.

 - Added full support for ``DISTINCT`` on queries where ``GROUP BY`` is
   present.

 - UDC pings will send ``licence.ident`` if defined from now on.

 - Added support for ``GROUP BY`` in combination with subselect. E.g.::

     SELECT x, COUNT(*) FROM (SELECT x FROM t LIMIT 1) AS tt GROUP BY x;

 - Implemented hash sum :ref:`scalar functions <scalar-functions>` (MD5, SHA1).
   Please see :ref:`sha1 <scalar-sha1>`.

 - Various admin UI improvements.

 - Added support for ``GROUP BY`` on joins.

 - Added support for :ref:`user-defined functions <user-defined-functions>`.

 - Added JavaScript language for user-defined functions.

 - Added cluster check and warning for unlicensed usage of CrateDB Enterprise.

 - Added built-in ``fingerprint``, ``keep_types``, ``min_hash`` and
   ``serbian_normalization`` token filter.

 - Added a ``fingerprint`` built-in analyzer.

 - Upgraded to Elasticsearch 5.0.2.

 - Improved performance of blob stats computation by calculating them in an
   incremental manner.

 - Optimized performance of negation queries on ``NOT NULL`` columns.  E.g.::

     SELECT * FROM t WHERE not_null_col != 10

 - Updated documentation to indicate that it's not possible to use ``object``,
   ``geo_point``, ``geo_shape``, or ``array`` in the ``ORDER BY`` clause.

 - Removed ``psql.enabled`` and ``psql.port`` settings from ``sys.cluster``
   because they where wrongly exposed in this table.

 - Use the region of the EC2 instance for EC2 discovery when neither
   ``cloud.aws.ec2.endpoint`` nor ``cloud.aws.region`` are specified or do not
   resolve in a valid service endpoint.

 - It is now possible to restore an empty partitioned table.

 - Added validation that ``ORDER BY`` symbols are included in the ``SELECT``
   list when ``DISTINCT`` is used.


Fixes
-----

 - Fixed an issue which could result in queries being stuck if the thread pools
   are exhausted.

 - Fixed an issue which caused failing ``sys.snapshot`` queries if the
   ``data.path`` of an existing fs repository was not configured anymore.

 - Fixed that ``sys.snapshot`` queries hung instead of throwing an error if
   something went wrong.


.. _version_2.0.0_upgrade_notes:

Upgrade Notes
=============


Daemon User
-----------

You can no longer run CrateDB as the superuser on Unix-like systems. You should
create a new ``crate`` user for running the CrateDB daemon.


Logging
-------

The ``logging.yml`` has been removed. You must migrate your :ref:`conf-logging`
configuration to the new ``log4j2.properties`` file.


System Properties
-----------------

You can no longer use the ``JAVA_OPTIONS`` or ``CRATE_JAVA_OPTS`` environment
variables to pass configuration to CrateDB itself, for example::

    JAVA_OPTIONS=-Dcluster.name=crate

Or::

    CRATE_JAVA_OPTS=-Dcluster.name=crate

Instead, you must pass these options in on the :ref:`cli`.

You can continue to use the ``JAVA_OPTIONS`` and ``CRATE_JAVA_OPTS``
environment variables to set general JVM properties and CrateDB specific JVM
properties, respectively.


Configuration Changes
---------------------

Many configuration settings and files have been renamed or removed. You must
review the `Breaking Changes`_ section above and update your setup as
necessary.


SQL Changes
-----------

Several breaking changes were made to CrateDB's SQL. This includes changes to
time parsing, syntax changes, and new reserved keywords. You must review the
`Breaking Changes`_ section above and update your client code as necessary.


Bind Address
------------

The default bind address has been changed from ``0.0.0.0`` to the loopback
address (meaning it will only be accessible on ``localhost``). See
:ref:`conf_hosts` for more.

If you want to keep the original behaviour (i.e. bind to every available
network interface) you must add the following line to your :ref:`config` file::

    network.host: 0.0.0.0

.. NOTE::

   If you bind to a network reachable IP address, you must follow the
   instructions in the new `bootstrap checks`_ guide.

.. _bootstrap checks: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/bootstrap-checks.html


Heap Size
---------

If you have previously set or configured ``CRATE_MIN_MEM`` or ``CRATE_MAX_MEM``
in your startup scripts or environment, you must remove both, and replace them
with a single variable ``CRATE_HEAP_SIZE``. The :ref:`CRATE_HEAP_SIZE
<conf-env-heap-size>` variable sets both the minimum and maximum memory to
allocate, and should be set to whatever your previous ``CRATE_MAX_MEM`` was set
to.


Cluster name in path data
-------------------------

The computation of the effective data directory path has changed in a way that
the cluster name is not part of the path anymore. In previous versions it was
``$PATH_DATA_DIR/$CLUSTER_NAME/nodes/`` and now it is
``$PATH_DATA_DIR/nodes/``. There's a fallback that still accepts the old data
structure, which will be removed in future versions of CrateDB.  It will be
required that the data directory is either moved to the new location or the
``path.data`` setting gets changed to point to the old location by appending
the clustername to it (e.g ``/data/`` becomes
``/data/yourclustername``). Therefore it's not possible anymore for multiple
clusters to share the exact same ``path.data`` directory.


Boolean Data Type
-----------------

Tables that have been created with CrateDB version ``0.54.x`` or smaller and
that contain a column of type ``BOOLEAN`` must be re-created_ to be able to
perform all supported operations on that column.

.. _re-created: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/sql/system.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated
