.. _version_2.1.0:

=============
Version 2.1.0
=============

Released on 2017/07/11.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB
    :ref:`version_1.1.3` or higher before you upgrade to 2.1.0.

    You cannot perform a `rolling upgrade`_ to this version. Any upgrade to
    this version will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

    Consult the upgrade notes for :ref:`Version 2.1.0
    <version_2.1.0_upgrade_notes>` when upgrading.

.. WARNING::

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/rolling-upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/full-restart-upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Changelog
=========


Breaking Changes
----------------

- ``CURRENT_USER``, ``USER`` and ``SESSION_USER`` are now reserved words as we
  introduced them as :ref:`system functions <scalar-sysinfo>`. These terms will
  not be available to be used as table, and column names and for already
  existing entities they will have to be quoted when referenced (otherwise the
  terms will be treated as :ref:`function calls <sql-function-call>`).

- ``SELECT`` statements without any ``FROM`` items are no longer executed
  against the ``sys.cluster`` table, but against a virtual table with no
  columns. Queries including ``sys.cluster`` columns but no explicit ``FROM``
  item will now result in a ``ColumnUnknownException``.

- The ``onModule()`` method had been removed from ``io.crate.Plugin``
  interface; ``createGuiceModules()`` must be used instead.

- ``srv`` and ``azure`` are no longer valid configuration options for
  ``discovery.type``. Instead there is a new ``discovery.zen.hosts_provider``
  settings which can be set to either ``srv`` or ``azure``.

- Duplicate definition of settings is neither allowed in the ``crate.yml`` file
  nor as command line options. However, settings provided via command line
  arguments can still override the settings defined in the ``crate.yml`` file.

- The syntax for creating columns on ``Create Table`` and ``Alter Table`` has
  become more strict.

- The ``sigar`` jar and object files have been moved from ``plugins/sigar`` to
  ``lib/sigar``.


Changes
-------

- Updated Elasticsearch to ``5.2.2``.

- Updated Crash to ``0.21.3``.

- Updated the Admin UI to ``1.4.1``.

- The table setting ``recovery.initial_shards`` has been deprecated. You may
  set ``gateway.local.initial_shards`` per node instead.
  CrateDB will continue to read the old setting but applications should be
  migrated to the new setting.

- Added support for ``GRANT`` and ``REVOKE`` privileges for accessing the
  cluster. Currently supported privilege types: ``DQL``, ``DML`` and ``DDL``.

- Added support for ``GRANT``, ``DENY`` and ``REVOKE`` privileges for
  accessing the tables and schemas.

- Added column ``username`` to ``sys.jobs`` and ``sys.jobs_log`` that contains
  the username under which the job was invoked.

- Added SSL/TLS support for HTTP endpoints.

- Added SSL/TLS support for PostgreSQL Wire Protocol.

- Added new HBA setting ``ssl`` which allows to control whether
  users have to connect with SSL enabled or disabled.

- Added support for client certificate authentication via HBA.

- Added support for joins on virtual tables.

- Queries which contain a correlated :ref:`subquery <gloss-subquery>` will now
  result in an error stating that correlated subqueries are not supported,
  instead of a more confusing error indicating that a relation is unknown.

- Extended the output of the ``EXPLAIN`` statement.


.. _version_2.1.0_upgrade_notes:

Upgrade Notes
=============


Database User
-------------

Clients that use the `PostgreSQL Wire Protocol`_ need to connect with a valid
database user to get access to the server. See the official `Crate JDBC
Driver`_ documentation for further information.

.. _PostgreSQL Wire Protocol: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/protocols/postgres.html
.. _Crate JDBC Driver: https://cratedb.com/docs/jdbc/en/latest/


Upgrading from version 2.0.x
----------------------------

If you're using CrateDB's BLOB storage and you need to run at least version
2.0.4 before upgrading to 2.1.0.

Please consult the :ref:`version_2.0.4` release notes for further details.


Create columns syntax strictness
................................

The syntax strictness when creating new columns has been increased:

- Columns cannot contain a dot when using alter table. Instead, you can still
  use the subscript pattern to add an object column.

- The use of references as a key of a subscript is not possible anymore. E.g.
  instead of ``col_name[index]``, you'll need to use ``col_name['index']``. Be
  aware that the use of single quotes will cause the index to be case
  sensitive.


Upgrading from versions prior to 2.0.0
--------------------------------------

Please consult the :ref:`version_2.0.0_upgrade_notes` for 2.0.0.
