.. _version_2.3.0:

=============
Version 2.3.0
=============

Released on 2017/12/22.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB
    :ref:`version_1.1.3` or higher before you upgrade to 2.3.0.

    You cannot perform a `rolling upgrade`_ to this version. Any upgrade to
    this version will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

.. WARNING::

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/rolling-upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/full-restart-upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Changelog
=========


Breaking Changes
----------------

- Certain metrics in the ``sys.nodes`` table have been deprecated and now
  always return ``-1``, except network metrics with still return ``0`` as
  previously when Sigar was not available.

  The affected metrics are: network metrics, read/write filesystem metrics for
  individual disks, system/user/idle/stolen values for CPU, and system/user
  values for process CPU.

  This is due to the removal of the "Sigar" library dependency.

- The default value of the setting ``auth.host_based.enabled`` (``false``) is
  overwritten with ``true`` in the ``crate.yml`` that is shipped with the
  tarball and Linux distributions of CrateDB and also contains a sane default
  configuration for ``auth.host_based.config``.

  This is done in order to provide a better default installation for new users
  without breaking exising HBA configurations.

  An implication of these settings is that whenever Enterprise is enabled
  (default behaviour) connections from remote hosts *always* require password
  authentication. Note, that when running CrateDB in Docker, the host of the
  Docker container is also considered a remote host.

- Columns aren't implicitly cast to a type anymore. Whenever columns are
  compared to Literals (e.g. 'string', 1, 1.2), these literals will be
  converted to the column type but not vice-versa. The column can still be
  manually cast to a type by using a :ref:`cast function <data-types-casting>`.

- Table ``information_schema.table_constraints`` is now returning
  ``constraint_name`` as type string instead of type array. Constraint type
  ``PRIMARY_KEY`` has been changed to ``PRIMARY KEY``. Also ``PRIMARY KEY``
  constraint is not returned when not explicitly defined.

- :ref:`Scalar functions <scalar-functions>` are resolved more strictly based
  on the argument types. This means that built-in functions with the same name
  as :ref:`user-defined functions <user-defined-functions>` will always "hide"
  the latter, even if the UDF has a different set of arguments. Using the same
  name as a built-in function for a user defined function is considered bad
  practice.


Changes
-------

- Added the ``hyperloglog_distinct`` :ref:`aggregation function
  <aggregation-functions>`. This feature is only available in the Enterprise
  Edition.

- Added a ``os['cpu']['used']`` column to the ``sys.nodes`` table. This
  replaces the deprecated system/user/idle/stolen values.

- Added a ``cgroup`` object column to the ``sys.nodes`` table. This column
  contains cgroup information which is relevant when running CrateDB inside a
  containers.

- Subqueries which filter on primary key columns now have the same realtime
  semantics as the equivalent top-level queries.

- Added support for disabling the column store for ``STRING`` columns on table
  creation and when adding columns. In conjunction with disabling indexing on
  that columns, this will support storing strings greater than 32kb. Be aware,
  that the performance of aggregations, groupings and sorting on such columns
  will decrease.

- Added support for ``ORDER BY``, ``GROUP BY`` and global aggregates on columns
  with disabled indexing (``INDEX OFF``).

- Added support for scalar subqueries in ``DELETE`` and ``UPDATE`` statements.

- Added ``UNION ALL`` :ref:`operator <gloss-operator>` to produce the combined
  result of two or more queries, e.g.:

  .. code-block:: psql

    SELECT id FROM t1
    UNION ALL
    SELECT id FROM t2

- Added the "password" authentication method which is available for connections
  via the PostgreSQL wire protocol and HTTP. This method allows clients to
  authenticate using a valid database user and its password. For HTTP, the
  ``X-User`` header, used to provide a username, has been deprecated in favour
  of the standard HTTP ``Authorization`` header with the Basic Authentication
  Scheme.

- Added a ``WITH`` clause to ``CREATE USER`` statement to specify user
  properties upon creation. The single property available right now is the
  ``password`` property which can be used for "password" authentication.

  The passwords of existing users can be changed using the ``ALTER USER``
  statement.

  Note that user passwords are never stored in clear-text inside CrateDB!

- The "address" field of the ``auth.host_based.config`` setting allows the
  special ``_local_`` identifier additionally to IP and CIDR notation.
  ``_local_`` matches both IPv4 and IPv6 connections from localhost.

- Table ``information_schema.key_column_usage`` is now populated with primary
  key information of user generated tables.

- Table ``information_schema.table_constraints`` is now also returning the
  ``NOT_NULL`` constraint.

- Added new cluster setting ``routing.rebalance.enable`` that allows to enable
  or disable shard rebalancing on the cluster.

- Added support to manually control the :ref:`allocation of shards
  <gloss-shard-allocation>` using ``ALTER TABLE REROUTE``. Supported
  reroute-options are: ``MOVE``, ``ALLOCATE REPLICA``, and ``CANCEL``.

- Added support to manually retry the allocation of shards that failed to
  allocate using ``ALTER CLUSTER REROUTE RETRY FAILED``.

- Added new table setting ``allocation.max_retries`` that defines the number of
  attempts to allocate a shard before giving up and leaving it unallocated.

- Added new system table ``sys.allocations`` which lists shards and their
  allocation state including the reasoning why they are in a certain state.

- :ref:`Function <gloss-function>` arguments are now linked to each other,
  where possible. This enables type inference between arguments such that
  arguments can be converted to match a function's signature. For example,
  ``coalesce(integer, long)`` would have resulted in an "unknown function"
  message. We now convert this call into ``coalesce(long, long)``. The
  conversion is possible through a type precedence list and convertibility
  checks on the data types.

- Functions which accept :ref:`regular expression <gloss-regular-expression>`
  flags now throw an error when invalid flags are provided.

- Clients using the PostgreSQL wire protocol will now receive an additional
  ``crate_version`` ParameterStatus message when establishing a connection.
  This can be used to identify the server as ``CrateDB``.

- Added the ``typtype`` column to ``pg_catalog.pg_type`` for better
  compatibility with certain PostgreSQL client libraries.

- Added the ``pg_backend_pid()`` function for enhanced PostgreSQL
  compatibility.

- Added support for the PSQL ParameterDescription message which allows to get
  the parameter types in prepared statements up front without specifying the
  actual arguments first. This fixes compatibility issues with some drivers.
  This works for the most common use cases except for DDL statements.

- Upgraded Elasticsearch to version 5.6.3.

- Updated the `CrateDB command line shell`_ (Crash) to version 0.23.0, which
  added support for password authentication and pasting multiple statements at
  once.

- Update the Admin UI to use new CPU metrics for its graphs.

- Hadoop2 dependencies for the HDFS repository plugin have been upgraded to
  version 2.8.1.


.. _CrateDB command line shell: https://crate.io/docs/crate/crash/en/latest/
