.. _version_3.1.3:

=============
Version 3.1.3
=============

Released on 2018/11/19.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 2.0.4 or higher
    before you upgrade to 3.1.3.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 3.0 release before moving to
    3.1.3.

    If you want to perform a `rolling upgrade`_, your current CrateDB version
    number must be at least :ref:`version_3.1.1`. Any upgrade from a version
    prior to this will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created prior to upgrading to CrateDB 2.x will not
    function with 3.1 and must be recreated before moving to 3.1.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` while running a
    2.x release into a new table, or by `inserting the data into a new table`_.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/rolling-upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/full-restart-upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated


.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Changelog
=========


Fixes
-----

- Updated the Admin UI to 1.10.4 which includes the following fixes:

  - Fixed an issue that caused the cluster and node checks to not be refreshed
    when clicking on the ``refresh`` icon.

  - Fixed an issue that caused the Twitter importer to redirect to ``/``
    instead of ``/help``.

  - Fixed the navigation component to allow opening URLs in new tabs.

- Fixed a race condition that could allow the creation of partitions with a
  different schema than other partitions within the same partitioned table.

- Changed the ``user`` hdfs repository parameter to ``security.principal``, as that is
  the parameter used by the underlying repository-hdfs plugin.

- Removed the ``conf_location`` hdfs repository parameter as it is no longer used.

- Fixed an issue that caused zombie entries in ``sys.jobs`` if the
  ``fetchSize`` functionality of PostgreSQL wire protocol based clients is
  used.

- Fixed a memory leak in the ``MQTT`` ingest service.

- Fixed a memory leak that could occur with clients connecting via PostgreSQL
  protocol and invoking read queries with statements containing expressions
  that would fail (such as ``1 / 0``).

- Fixed an issue in the PostgreSQL wire protocol that could result in nodes
  crashing with ``OutOfMemoryError`` if clients queried very large tables
  without specifying the fetch size.

- Fixed an issue that caused missing privilege errors if table aliases were
  used.
