.. _version_3.2.0:

=============
Version 3.2.0
=============

Released on 2018/12/19.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 2.0.4 or higher
    before you upgrade to 3.2.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 3.1 release before moving to
    3.2.0.

    You cannot perform a `rolling upgrade`_ to this version. Any upgrade to
    this version will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

    When restarting, CrateDB will migrate indexes to a newer format. Depending
    on the amount of data, this may delay node start-up time.

    Please consult the :ref:`version_3.0.0_upgrade_notes` before upgrading.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created prior to upgrading to CrateDB 2.x will not
    function with 3.2 and must be recreated before moving to 3.2.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` while running a
    2.x release into a new table, or by `inserting the data into a new table`_.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/rolling-upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/full-restart-upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


.. _version_3.2.0_upgrade_notes:

Upgrade Notes
=============


Logging Configuration Changes
-----------------------------

The default logging configuration for CrateDB in ``log4j2.properties`` has been
changed. If you have customised this :ref:`logging configuration
<conf-logging-log4j>`, you should replace the ``$marker`` entry with
``[%node_name] %marker``.


Deprecated Settings and Features
--------------------------------

In previous versions, the CrateDB license was set via the ``license.ident``
configuration setting. This has now been deprecated, and going forward the
CrateDB license should be set using the :ref:`ref-set-license` statement.

The ``INGEST`` framework has been deprecated, and will be removed in the
future.

The ``http.enabled`` setting has been deprecated, and will be removed in the
future.

The ``delimited_payload_filter`` built-in token filter for fulltext analyzers
has been renamed to ``delimited_payload``. The ``delimited_payload_filter``
name can still be used, but is deprecated, and will be removed in the future.


Changelog
=========


Breaking Changes
----------------

- The ``*`` of ``SELECT *`` statements in the query clause of :ref:`view
  definitions <ddl-views>` is no longer expanded at view creation time but lazy
  whenever a view is :ref:`evaluated <gloss-evaluation>`. That means columns
  added to a table after the views initial creation will show up in queries on
  the view. It is generally recommended to avoid using ``*`` in views but
  always specify columns explicitly.


Changes
-------


New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added support for executing existing :ref:`aggregation functions
  <aggregation-functions>` as :ref:`window functions <window-functions>` using
  the :ref:`OVER <sql-select-over>` clause.

- Added support for CrateDB license management enabling users to trial the
  enterprise-features, set a production enterprise license, or continue using
  the community edition. Additionally, a new :ref:`SET LICENSE
  <ref-set-license>` statement has been added for license registration, and the
  ``license.ident`` setting has become ``@deprecated``.


SQL Improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added the :ref:`REPLACE <scalar-replace>` :ref:`scalar function
  <scalar-functions>` replacing substrings in a string with another string.

- Added the :ref:`GENERATE_SERIES(start, stop [, step ])
  <table-functions-generate-series>` :ref:`table function <table-functions>`
  which can generate a series of numbers.

- Implemented the :ref:`ARRAY_UPPER <scalar-array_upper>`, :ref:`ARRAY_LENGTH
  <scalar-array_length>` and :ref:`ARRAY_LOWER <scalar-array_lower>` scalar
  functions that return the upper and respectively lower bound of a given array
  dimension.

- Added support for the :ref:`ARRAY(subquery) <sql_expressions_array_subquery>`
  :ref:`expression <gloss-expression>`, which can turn the result from a
  :ref:`subquery <gloss-subquery>` into an array.

- The :ref:`= ANY <sql_dql_any_array>` :ref:`operator <gloss-operator>` now
  also supports operations on object arrays or nested arrays. This enables
  queries like ``WHERE ['foo', 'bar'] = ANY(object_array(string_array))``.

- Added support for :ref:`SHOW parameter_name | ALL <ref-show>` to retrieve one
  or all session setting value(s).

- Added support for :ref:`INITCAP(string) <scalar-initcap>` which capitalizes
  the first letter of every word while turning all others into lowercase.

- Added the :ref:`scalar <gloss-scalar>` expression :ref:`CURRENT_DATABASE
  <scalar-current_database>` which returns the current database.

- :ref:`Functions <gloss-function>` like :ref:`CURRENT_SCHEMA
  <scalar-current_schema>` and :ref:`CURRENT_USER <scalar-current_user>`,
  which depend on the active session can now be used as :ref:`generated columns
  <ddl-generated-columns>`.

- Added support for using :ref:`table functions <table-functions>` in the
  ``SELECT`` list of a query.

- :ref:`geo_shape <data-types-geo-shape>` columns can now be casted to
  ``object`` with ``cast`` in addition to ``try_cast``.

- Improved the handling of :ref:`function expressions <sql-function-call>`
  inside subscripts used on object columns. This allows expressions like
  ``obj['x' || 'x']`` to be used.

- ``<object_column> = <object_literal>`` comparisons now try to utilize the
  index for the objects contents and can therefore run much faster.

- Values of byte-size and time based configuration setting do not require a
  unit suffix anymore. Without a unit time values are treat as milliseconds
  since epoch and byte size values are treat as bytes.

- Added support of using units inside byte-size or time bases statement
  parameters values. E.g. ``1mb`` for one megabyte or ``1s`` for one Second.


PostgreSQL Compatibility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added the :ref:`pg_catalog.pg_database <postgres-pg_catalog>` table.

- Added ``pg_class``, ``pg_namespace``, ``pg_attribute``, ``pg_attrdef``,
  ``pg_index`` and ``pg_constraint`` tables to the :ref:`pg_catalog
  <postgres-pg_catalog>` schema for improved compatibility with PostgreSQL.

- Improved the compatibility with PostgreSQL clients that use the ``text`` type
  for parameter encoding.

- Changed PostgreSQL wire interface to emulate version ``10.5``.

- Added some type aliases for improved compatibility with PostgreSQL.

- Expand the :ref:`search_path <conf-session-search-path>` setting to accept a
  list of schemas that will be searched when a relation (table, view or
  :ref:`user-defined function <user-defined-functions>`) is referenced without
  specifying a schema. The system :ref:`pg_catalog <postgres-pg_catalog>`
  schema is implicitly included as the first one in the path.


Database Administration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added support for changing the number of shards on an existing table or
  partition using the :ref:`ALTER TABLE SET <sql-alter-table-set-reset>`
  statement.

- Improved resiliency of the :ref:`ALTER TABLE: RENAME TO
  <sql-alter-table-rename-to>` operation by making it an atomic operation.

- Added an :ref:`ALTER CLUSTER SWAP TABLE <alter_cluster_swap_table>` statement
  that can be used to switch the names of two tables.

- Added a :ref:`ALTER CLUSTER GC DANGLING ARTIFACTS
  <alter_cluster_gc_dangling_artifacts>` statement that can be used to clean up
  internal structures that weren't properly cleaned up due to cluster failures
  during operations which create such temporary artifacts.

- Added support for per-table :ref:`shard allocation filtering
  <ddl_shard_allocation>`.


Admin UI Upgrade to 1.11.3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Changed the license information (ident) to be taken from the
  `sys.cluster.licence` attribute instead of the `license.ident` setting, which
  is ``@deprecated``.

- Addition of French language files and menu options.

- Fixed an issue that caused incorrectness in the navigation of the Admin UI.

- Updated the license container to be responsive in the Admin UI.

- Various other improvements.


Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- The ``MQTT`` endpoint has been deprecated and will be removed in a future
  version.

- Deprecated the ``http.enabled`` setting which will be always on in future.


Other
~~~~~

- Upgraded to Elasticsearch 6.5.1, which includes changes to the default
  logging configuration.

- Added a :ref:`remove_duplicates <analyzers_remove_duplicates>` token filter.

- Added a :ref:`char_group <analyzers_char_group>` tokenizer.

- Renamed the ``delimited_payload_filter`` token filter to
  :ref:`delimited_payload <delimited_payload-tokenfilter>`. The old name can
  still be used, but is deprecated.

For further information on CrateDB 3.2.0 see our `announcement blogpost
<blogpost_>`__.


.. _blogpost: https://crate.io/a/cratedb-3-2-stable-available-now/
