.. _version_4.0.0:

=============
Version 4.0.0
=============

Released on 2019/06/25.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 3.0.4 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.0.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 3.3 release before moving to
    4.0.0.

    An upgrade to :ref:`version_4.0.0` requires a `full restart upgrade`_.

    When restarting, CrateDB will migrate indexes to a newer format. Depending
    on the amount of data, this may delay node start-up time.

    Please consult the :ref:`v4.0.0-upgrade-notes` before upgrading.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created prior CrateDB 3.x will not function with 4.x and
    must be recreated before moving to 4.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _full restart upgrade: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/full-restart-upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


.. _v4.0.0-upgrade-notes:

Upgrade Notes
=============


.. _v4.0.0-discovery-changes:

Discovery Changes
-----------------

This version of CrateDB uses a new cluster coordination (discovery)
implementation which improves resiliency and master election times.  A new
voting mechanism is used when a node is removed or added which makes the system
capable of automatically maintaining an optimal level of fault tolerance even
in situations of network partitions.

This eliminates the need of the easily miss configured ``minimum_master_nodes``
setting.

Additionally a rare resiliency failure, recorded as :ref:`Repeated cluster
partitions can cause cluster state updates to be lost
<resiliency_cluster_partitions_cause_lost_cluster_updates>` can no longer
occur.

Due to this some discovery settings are added, renamed and removed.

+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Old Name                               | New Name                         |
+========================================+==================================+
| New, required on upgrade.              | ``cluster.initial_master_nodes`` |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| ``discovery.zen.hosts_provider``       | ``discovery.seed_providers``     |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| ``discovery.zen.ping.unicast.hosts``   | ``discovery.seed_hosts``         |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| ``discovery.zen.minimum_master_nodes`` | Removed                          |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| ``discovery.zen.ping_interval``        | Removed                          |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| ``discovery.zen.ping_timeout``         | Removed                          |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| ``discovery.zen.ping_retries``         | Removed                          |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| ``discovery.zen.publish_timeout``      | Removed                          |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+

.. CAUTION::

   The :ref:`cluster.initial_master_nodes <cluster.initial_master_nodes>`
   setting is required to be set at production (non loopback bound) clusters on
   upgrade, see the :ref:`setting documentation <cluster.initial_master_nodes>`
   for details.

.. NOTE::

   Only a single port value is allowed for each ``discovery.seed_hosts``
   setting entry. Defining a port range as it was allowed but ignored in
   previous versions under the old setting name
   ``discovery.zen.ping.unicast.hosts``, will be rejected.

.. NOTE::

   CrateDB will refuse to start when it encounters an unknown setting, like the
   above mentioned removed ones. Please make sure to adjust your ``crate.yml``
   or CMD arguments upfront.


.. _v4.0.0-breaking:

Breaking Changes
================


.. _v4.0.0-breaking-general:

General
-------

- Renamed CrateDB data types to the corresponding PostgreSQL data types.

  +---------------+------------------------------+
  | Current Name  | New Name                     |
  +===============+==============================+
  | ``short``     | ``smallint``                 |
  +---------------+------------------------------+
  | ``long``      | ``bigint``                   |
  +---------------+------------------------------+
  | ``float``     | ``real``                     |
  +---------------+------------------------------+
  | ``double``    | ``double precision``         |
  +---------------+------------------------------+
  | ``byte``      | ``char``                     |
  +---------------+------------------------------+
  | ``string``    | ``text``                     |
  +---------------+------------------------------+
  | ``timestamp`` | ``timestamp with time zone`` |
  +---------------+------------------------------+

  See :ref:`data-types` for more detailed information. The old data type names,
  are registered as aliases for backward comparability.

- Changed the ordering of columns to be based on their position in the
  :ref:`CREATE TABLE <sql-create-table>` statement. This was done to improve
  compatibility with PostgreSQL and will affect queries like ``SELECT * FROM``
  or ``INSERT INTO <table> VALUES (...)``

- Changed the default :ref:`column_policy` on tables from ``dynamic`` to
  ``strict``. Columns of type object still default to ``dynamic``.

- Removed the implicit soft limit of 10000 that was applied for clients using
  ``HTTP``.

- Dropped support for Java versions < 11


.. _v4.0.0-breaking-rm-settings:

Removed Settings
----------------

- Removed the deprecated setting ``cluster.graceful_stop.reallocate``.

- Removed the deprecated ``http.enabled`` setting. ``HTTP`` is now always
  enabled and can no longer be disabled.

- Removed the deprecated ``license.ident`` setting. Licenses must be set using
  the :ref:`SET LICENSE <ref-set-license>` statement.

- Removed the deprecated ``license.enterprise`` setting. To use CrateDB without
  any enterprise features one should use the community edition instead.

- Removed the experimental ``enable_semijoin`` session setting. As this
  defaulted to false, this execution strategy cannot be used anymore.

- Removed the possibility of configuring the AWS S3 repository client via the
  ``crate.yaml`` configuration file and command line arguments. Please, use the
  :ref:`sql-create-repository` statement parameters for this purpose.

- Removed :ref:`HDFS repository <sql-create-repo-hdfs>` setting:
  ``concurrent_streams`` as it is no longer supported.

- The ``zen1`` related discovery settings mentioned in
  :ref:`v4.0.0-discovery-changes`.


.. _v4.0.0-breaking-sys:

System table changes
--------------------

- Changed the layout of the ``version`` column in the
  ``information_schema.tables`` and ``information_schema.table_partitions``
  tables. The version is now displayed directly under ``created`` and
  ``upgraded``. The ``cratedb`` and ``elasticsearch`` sub-category has been
  removed.

- Removed deprecated metrics from :ref:`sys.nodes <sys-nodes>`:

  +--------------------------------+
  | Metric name                    |
  +================================+
  |``fs['disks']['reads']``        |
  +--------------------------------+
  |``fs['disks']['bytes_read']``   |
  +--------------------------------+
  |``fs['disks']['writes']``       |
  +--------------------------------+
  |``fs['disks']['bytes_written']``|
  +--------------------------------+
  |``os['cpu']['system']``         |
  +--------------------------------+
  |``os['cpu']['user']``           |
  +--------------------------------+
  |``os['cpu']['idle']``           |
  +--------------------------------+
  |``os['cpu']['stolen']``         |
  +--------------------------------+
  |``process['cpu']['user']``      |
  +--------------------------------+
  |``process['cpu']['system']``    |
  +--------------------------------+

- Renamed column ``information_schema.table_partitions.schema_name`` to
  ``table_schema``.

- Renamed ``information_schema.columns.user_defined_type_*`` columns to
  ``information_schema_columns.udt_*`` for SQL standard compatibility.

- Changed type of column ``information_schema.columns.is_generated`` to
  ``STRING`` with value ``NEVER`` or ``ALWAYS`` for SQL standard compatibility.


.. _v4.0.0-breaking-rm-function:

Removed Functionality
---------------------

- The Elasticsearch REST API has been removed.

- Removed the deprecated ``ingest`` framework, including the ``MQTT`` endpoint.

- Removed the HTTP pipelining functionality. We are not aware of any client
  using this functionality.

- Removed the deprecated average duration and query frequency JMX metrics. The
  total counts and sum of durations as documented in :ref:`query_stats_mbean`
  should be used instead.

- Removed the deprecated ``ON DUPLICATE KEY`` syntax of :ref:`sql-insert`
  statements. Users can migrate to the ``ON CONFLICT`` syntax.

- Removed the ``index`` thread-pool and the ``bulk`` alias for the ``write``
  thread-pool. The JMX ``getBulk`` property of the ``ThreadPools`` bean has
  been renamed too ``getWrite``.

- Removed deprecated ``nGram``, ``edgeNGram`` token filter and ``htmlStrip``
  char filter, they are superseded by ``ngram``, ``edge_ngram`` and
  ``html_strip``.

- Removed the deprecated ``USR2`` signal handling. Use :ref:`ALTER CLUSTER
  DECOMMISSION <alter_cluster_decommission>` instead. Be aware that the
  behavior of sending ``USR2`` signals to a CrateDB process is now undefined
  and up to the JVM. In some cases it may still terminate the instance but
  without clean shutdown.


.. _v4.0.0-deprecations:

Deprecations
============

- Deprecate the usage of the :ref:`_version
  <sql_administration_system_column_version>` column for :ref:`sql_occ` in
  favour of the :ref:`_seq_no <sql_administration_system_columns_seq_no>` and
  :ref:`_primary_term <sql_administration_system_columns_primary_term>`
  columns.

- Deprecate the usage of the ``TIMESTAMP`` :ref:`alias data type <data-types-postgres-aliases>`
  as a timestamp with time zone, use the :ref:`TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE
  <type-timestamp-with-tz>` or the ``TIMESTAMPTZ`` data type alias
  instead. The ``TIMESTAMP`` data type will be an equivalent to data type
  without time zone in future ``CrateDB`` releases.

- Marked SynonymFilter tokenizer as deprecated.

- Marked LowerCase tokenizer as deprecated.


.. _v4.0.0-changes:

Changes
=======


.. _v4.0.0-changes-compat:

SQL Standard and PostgreSQL compatibility improvements
------------------------------------------------------

- Added support for using relation aliases with column aliases. Example:
  ``SELECT x, y from unnest([1], ['a']) as u(x, y)``

- Added support for column :ref:`sql-create-table-default-clause` for
  :ref:`sql-create-table`.

- Extended the support for :ref:`window functions <window-functions>`. The
  ``PARTITION BY`` definition and the ``CURRENT ROW -> UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING``
  frame definitions are now supported.

- Added the :ref:`aggregation-string-agg` :ref:`aggregation function
  <aggregation-functions>`.

- Added support for `SQL Standard Timestamp Format
  <https://crate.io/docs/sql-99/en/latest/chapters/08.html#timestamp-literal>`_
  to the :ref:`data-types-dates-times`.

- Added the :ref:`TIMESTAMP WITHOUT TIME ZONE <type-timestamp-without-tz>`
  data type.

- Added the :ref:`TIMESTAMPTZ <data-types-postgres-aliases>` alias for the
  :ref:`TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE <type-timestamp-with-tz>` data type.

- Added support for the :ref:`type 'string' <data-types-casting-str>`
  cast :ref:`operator <gloss-operator>`, which is used to initialize a constant
  of an arbitrary type.

- Added the :ref:`scalar-pg_get_userbyid` :ref:`scalar function <scalar-functions>` to
  enhance PostgreSQL compatibility.

- Enabled scalar function :ref:`evaluation <gloss-evaluation>` when used
  :ref:`in the query FROM clause in place of a
  relation<table-functions-scalar>`.

- Show the session setting description in the output of the ``SHOW ALL``
  statement.

- Added information for the internal PostgreSQL data type: ``name`` in
  :ref:`pg_catalog.pg_type <postgres-pg_type>` for improved PostgreSQL
  compatibility.

- Added the :ref:`pg_catalog.pg_settings <postgres-pg_catalog>` table.

- Added support for :ref:`sql_escape_string_literals`.

- Added :ref:`trim <scalar-trim>` scalar function that trims the (leading,
  trailing or both) set of characters from an input string.

- Added :ref:`string_to_array <scalar-string_to_array>` scalar function that
  splits an input string into an array of string elements using a separator and
  a null-string.

- Added missing PostgreSQL type mapping for the ``array(ip)`` collection type.

- Added :ref:`current_setting <scalar-current_setting>` system information
  scalar function that yields the current value of the setting.

- Allow :ref:`user-defined-functions` to be registered against the
  ``pg_catalog`` schema. This also extends :ref:`scalar-current_schema` to be
  addressable with ``pg_catalog`` included.

- Added :ref:`quote_ident <scalar-quote_ident>` scalar function that quotes a
  string if it is needed.


.. _v4.0.0-changes-users-acl:

Users and Access Control
------------------------

- Mask sensitive user account information in :ref:`sys.repositories
  <sys-repositories>` for repository types: ``azure``, ``s3``.

- Restrict access to log entries in :ref:`sys.jobs <sys-jobs>` and
  :ref:`sys.jobs_log <sys-logs>` to the current user.  This doesn't apply to
  superusers.

- Added a new ``Administration Language (AL)`` privilege type which allows
  users to manage other users and use ``SET GLOBAL``. See
  :ref:`administration-privileges`.


.. _v4.0.0-changes-snapshots:

Repositories and Snapshots
--------------------------

- Added support for the :ref:`Azure Storage repositories
  <sql-create-repo-azure>`.

- Changed the default value of the ``fs`` repository type setting ``compress``,
  to ``true``. See :ref:`fs repository parameters <sql-create-repo-fs-params>`.

- Improved resiliency of the :ref:`sql-create-snapshot` operation.


.. _v4.0.0-changes-perf-resiliency:

Performance and resiliency improvements
---------------------------------------

- Exposed the :ref:`_seq_no <sql_administration_system_columns_seq_no>` and
  :ref:`_primary_term <sql_administration_system_columns_primary_term>` system
  columns which can be used for :ref:`sql_occ`.  By introducing :ref:`_seq_no
  <sql_administration_system_columns_seq_no>` and :ref:`_primary_term
  <sql_administration_system_columns_primary_term>`, the following resiliency
  issues were fixed:

   - :ref:`Version Number Representing Ambiguous Row Versions
     <resiliency_ambiguous_row_versions>`

   - :ref:`Replicas can fall out of sync when a primary shard fails
     <resiliency_replicas_fall_out_of_sync>`

- Predicates like ``abs(x) = 1`` which require a :ref:`scalar function
  <scalar-functions>` :ref:`evaluation <gloss-evaluation>` and cannot operate
  on table indices directly are now candidates for the query cache. This can
  result in order of magnitude performance increases on subsequent queries.

- Routing awareness attributes are now also taken into consideration for
  primary key lookups. (Queries like ``SELECT * FROM t WHERE pk = 1``)

- Changed the circuit breaker logic to measure the real heap usage instead of
  the memory reserved by child circuit breakers. This should reduce the chance
  of nodes running into an out of memory error.

- Added a new optimization that allows to run predicates on top of views or
  sub-queries more efficiently in some cases.


.. _v4.0.0_changes-others:

Others
------

- Added support for dynamical reloading of SSL certificates.  See
  :ref:`ssl_configure_keystore`.

- Added ``minimum_index_compatibility_version`` and
  ``minimum_wire_compatibility_version`` to :ref:`sys.version <sys-versions>` to
  expose the current state of the node's index and wire protocol version as
  part of the :ref:`sys.nodes <sys-nodes>` table.

- Upgraded to Lucene 8.0.0, and as part of this the BM25 scoring has changed.
  The order of the scores remain the same, but the values of the scores differ.
  Fulltext queries including ``_score`` filters may behave slightly different.

- Added a new ``_docid`` :ref:`system column
  <sql_administration_system_columns>`.

- Added support for :ref:`subscript expressions <sql-subscripts>` on an object
  column of a sub-relation.  Examples: ``SELECT a['b'] FROM (SELECT a FROM
  t1)`` or ``SELECT a['b'] FROM my_view`` where ``my_view`` is defined as
  ``SELECT a FROM t1``.
