.. _version_4.0.6:

=============
Version 4.0.6
=============

Released on 2019/10/03.

.. NOTE::

    Please consult the :ref:`v4.0.0-upgrade-notes` before upgrading from
    CrateDB 3.x or earlier.  Before upgrading to 4.0.6 you should be running a
    CrateDB cluster that is at least on 3.0.7.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 3.3 release before moving to
    4.0.6.

    If you want to perform a `rolling upgrade`_, your current CrateDB version
    number must be at least :ref:`version_4.0.2`. Any upgrade from a version
    prior to this will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

    When restarting, CrateDB will migrate indexes to a newer format. Depending
    on the amount of data, this may delay node start-up time.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created prior CrateDB 3.x will not function with 4.x and
    must be recreated before moving to 4.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/rolling-upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/full-restart-upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.0.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.0 series.


Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that could prevent accounted memory from being properly
  de-accounted on queries using ``hyperloglog_distinct``, leading clients to
  eventually receive ``CircuitBreakingException`` error messages and also
  breaking internal recovery operations.

- Fixed an issue that caused the users list in the privileges tab to not
  displayed when the CrateDB Admin UI is not served from ``/``.

- Fixed various issues in the CrateDB Admin UI console.

- Fixed an issue that caused the Twitter tutorial to not start automatically
  after the login redirect in the CrateDB Admin UI.

- Fixed an issue that prevented subqueries from being used in select item
  :ref:`expressions <gloss-expression>` that also contain a reference accessed
  via a relation alias.  For example: ``SELECT t.y IN (SELECT x FROM t2) FROM
  t1 t``

- Fail the storage engine if indexing on a replica shard fails after it was
  successfully done on a primary shard. It prevents replica and primary shards
  from going out of sync.

- Fixed bug in the disk threshold decider logic that would ignore to account
  new relocating shard (``STARTED`` to ``RELOCATING``) when deciding how to
  :ref:`allocate <gloss-shard-allocation>` or relocate shards with respect to
  :ref:`cluster.routing.allocation.disk.watermark.low
  <cluster.routing.allocation.disk.watermark.low>` and
  :ref:`cluster.routing.allocation.disk.watermark.high
  <cluster.routing.allocation.disk.watermark.high>` settings.

- Fixed regression that prevented shards from reallocation when a node passes
  over :ref:`cluster.routing.allocation.disk.watermark.high
  <cluster.routing.allocation.disk.watermark.high>`.

- Removed a case where a ``NullPointerException`` was logged if a HTTP client
  disconnected before a pending response could be sent to the client.
