.. _version_4.0.11:

==============
Version 4.0.11
==============

Released on 2020/01/15.

.. NOTE::

    Please consult the :ref:`v4.0.0-upgrade-notes` before upgrading from
    CrateDB 3.x or earlier.
    Before upgrading to 4.0.11 you should be running a CrateDB cluster that is
    at least on 3.0.7.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 3.3 release before moving to
    4.0.11.

    If you want to perform a `rolling upgrade`_, your current CrateDB version
    number must be at least :ref:`version_4.0.2`. Any upgrade from a version
    prior to this will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

    When restarting, CrateDB will migrate indexes to a newer format. Depending
    on the amount of data, this may delay node start-up time.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created prior CrateDB 3.x will not function with 4.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 4.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/rolling-upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/full-restart-upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated


.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.0.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.0 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that prevented statements from showing up in ``sys.jobs_log``
  if they run into an error.

- Fixed an NPE which occurred when using the ``current_timestamp`` inside the
  ``WHERE`` clause on a **view** relation.

- Fixed the data type of the ``sys.jobs_metrics.classification['labels']``
  column, should be ``text_array`` instead of an ``undefined`` type.

- Fixed an issue that caused a type cast error in ``INSERT`` statements if the
  target table contained a ``array(object() as (...)`` column where a child of
  the object array contained a ``NOT NULL`` constraint.

- Fixed a ``NullPointerException`` that could prevent a node from starting up.
  This could occur if the node crashed or disconnected while a user deleted a
  table.

- Improved the memory accounting for values of type ``geo_shape``, ``object``
  or ``undefined``. Previously an arbitrary fixed value was used for memory
  accounting. If the actual payloads are large, this could have led to out of
  memory errors as the memory usage was under-estimated.

- Fixed the type information of the ``fs['data']`` and ``fs['disks']`` column
  in the ``sys.nodes`` table. Querying those columns could have resulted in
  serialization errors.

- Fixed the support for the ``readonly`` property in ``CREATE REPOSITORY``.

- Fixed an issue that may cause a ``SELECT`` query to hang on multiple nodes
  cluster if a resource error like a ``CircuitBreakingException`` occurs.

- Fixed an issue that caused a ``INSERT INTO ... (SELECT ... FROM ..)``
  statement to fail if not all :ref:`partition columns
  <gloss-partition-column>` appeared in the target list of the ``INSERT INTO``
  statement.
