.. _version_4.0.10:

==============
Version 4.0.10
==============

Released on 2019/12/10.

.. NOTE::

    Please consult the :ref:`v4.0.0-upgrade-notes` before upgrading from
    CrateDB 3.x or earlier.  Before upgrading to 4.0.10 you should be running a
    CrateDB cluster that is at least on 3.0.7.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 3.3 release before moving to
    4.0.10.

    If you want to perform a `rolling upgrade`_, your current CrateDB version
    number must be at least :ref:`version_4.0.2`. Any upgrade from a version
    prior to this will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

    When restarting, CrateDB will migrate indexes to a newer format. Depending
    on the amount of data, this may delay node start-up time.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created prior CrateDB 3.x will not function with 4.x and
    must be recreated before moving to 4.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/rolling-upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/admin/full-restart-upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated


.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_4.0.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.0 series.


Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that would lead to incorrect behaviour of the insert from sub
  query statement for the scenario when the target table contains a
  :ref:`generated column <ddl-generated-columns>` with the
  :ref:`not_null_constraint` constraint and a value for the :ref:`generated
  column <ddl-generated-columns>` is not provided explicitly. For example, the
  insert statement below failed due to the :ref:`not_null_constraint`
  constraint violation::

     CREATE TABLE t (x INT, y AS x + 1 NOT NULL)
     INSERT INTO t (x) (SELECT 1)

- Fixed a potential memory accounting leak for queries with ``WHERE`` clauses
  on primary keys. This could lead to a node eventually rejecting all further
  queries with a ``CircuitBreakingException``.

- Improved snapshot error handling by assuring a snapshot is declared as failed
  when a shard or node failure happens during the snapshot process.

- Fixed an issue which may result in an ``ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException``
  while altering an empty partitioned table.

- Fixed a regression introduced in ``2.3.2`` which optimizes subqueries when
  used inside :ref:`multi-valued functions <gloss-multi-valued-functions>` and
  :ref:`operators <gloss-operator>` like ``IN()``, ``ANY()`` or ``ARRAY()`` by
  applying an implicit ordering. When using data types (e.g. like an object:
  ``select array(select {a = col} from test)`` which do not support ordering,
  an NPE was raised.

- Fixed a possible OutOfMemory issue which may happen on ``GROUP BY`` statement
  using a group key of type ``TEXT`` on tables containing at least one shard
  with a low to medium cardinality on the group key.

- Fixed an issue that caused an error when using ``ALTER TABLE .. ADD`` on a
  table which contains nested primary key columns.

- Fixed an issue where values of type ``array(varchar)`` were decoded
  incorrectly if they contained a ``,`` character. This occurred when the
  PostgreSQL wire protocol was used in ``text`` mode.

- Improved performance of snapshot finalization as
  https://github.com/crate/crate/pull/9327 introduced a performance regression
  on the snapshot process.

- Fixed a ``ClassCastException`` that could occur when using ``unnest`` on
  multi dimensional arrays.
