.. _version_4.1.1:

=============
Version 4.1.1
=============

Released on 2020-01-30.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.1.1.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.0 release before moving to
    4.1.1.

    A rolling upgrade to 4.1.1 from 4.0.2+ is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html


.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.1.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.1 series.


Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that caused queries on more than one relation and a literal
  ``FALSE`` in the ``WHERE`` clause to match all rows instead of no rows.

- Fixed the following issues in the Admin UI:

  - Fixed an issue that prevents the value for nested :ref:`partition columns
    <gloss-partition-column>` showing up in the table partitions overview.

  - Fixed capitalization of ``Shards`` tab label.

  - Updated keywords list so that they are recognised and painted in red.

- Fixed a bug which could lead to stuck queries when an error happens inside
  distributed execution plans, e.g., a ``CircuitBreakingException`` due to
  exceeded memory usage.

- Fixed an issue that resulted in the values for nested :ref:`partition columns
  <gloss-partition-column>` to be missing from the result.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``SELECT *`` to include nested columns of type
  ``geo_shape`` instead of only selecting top-level columns.

- Fixed a bug that would lead to insertion of records via ``INSERT INTO ...
  (SELECT ... FROM ..)`` and ``INSERT INTO ... VALUES (...)`` into different
  partitions while using the same partition by value. This occurs only when
  the partition key is an object field of the :ref:`timestamp
  <type-timestamp>` data type.

- Fixed an issue that caused :ref:`subscript expressions <sql-subscripts>` on
  top of child relations in which an object column is selected to fail.

- Fixed an issue in :ref:`ref-values` that would not allow combining
  :ref:`expressions <gloss-expression>` that can be explicitly casted or
  ``NULL`` literals in the same column.

- Fixed a ``ClassCastException`` that occurred when querying certain columns
  from ``information_schema.tables``, ``sys.jobs_log``, or ``sys.jobs_metrics``
  with a client connected via the PostgreSQL wire protocol.

- Fixed a regression introduced in ``4.0.11`` which caused a
  ``ClassCastException`` when querying ``sys.allocations``.
