.. _version_4.1.0:

=============
Version 4.1.0
=============

Released on 2020/01/15.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.1.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.0 release before moving to
    4.1.0.

    A rolling upgrade to 4.1.0 from 4.0.2+ is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html


.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Breaking Changes
================

- Changed :ref:`arithmetic operations <arithmetic>` ``*``, ``+``, and ``-`` of
  types ``integer`` and ``bigint`` to throw an exception instead of rolling
  over from positive to negative or the other way around.

- Remap CrateDB :ref:`data-types-objects` array data type from the PostgreSQL
  JSON to JSON array type. That might effect some drivers that use the
  PostgreSQL wire protocol to insert data into tables with object array typed
  columns. For instance, when using the ``Npgsql`` driver, it is not longer
  possible to insert an array of objects into a column of the object array data
  type by using the parameter of a SQL statement that has the JSON data type
  and an array of CLR as its value. Instead, use a string array with JSON
  strings that represent the objects. See the ``Npgsql`` documentation for more
  details.

- Changed how columns of type :ref:`data-types-geo` are being communicated
  to PostgreSQL clients.

  Before, clients were told that those columns are double arrays. Now, they are
  correctly mapped to the PostgreSQL ``point`` type. This means that
  applications using clients like ``JDBC`` will have to be adapted to use
  ``PgPoint``. (See `Geometric DataTypes in JDBC
  <https://jdbc.postgresql.org/documentation/head/geometric.html>`_)

- Changed the behavior of ``unnest`` to fully unnest multi dimensional arrays
  to their innermost type to be compatible with PostgreSQL.


Deprecations
============

- Deprecated the ``node.store.allow_mmapfs`` setting in favour of
  :ref:`node.store.allow_mmap <node.store_allow_mmap>`.


Changes
=======


Resiliency improvements
-----------------------

- Allow user to limit the number of threads on a single shard that may be
  merging at once via the :ref:`merge.scheduler.max_thread_count
  <sql-create-table-merge-scheduler-max-thread-count>` table parameter.

- Some ``ALTER TABLE`` operations now internally invoke a single cluster state
  update instead of multiple cluster state updates. This change improves
  resiliency because there is no longer a window where the cluster state could
  be inconsistent.

- Changed the default garbage collector from Concurrent Mark Sweep to G1GC.
  This should lead to shorter GC pauses.

- Added a dynamic bulk sizing mechanism that should prevent ``INSERT INTO ...
  FROM query`` operations from running into out-of-memory errors when the
  individual records of a table are large.

- Added the :ref:`cluster.routing.allocation.total_shards_per_node
  <cluster.routing.allocation.total_shards_per_node>` setting.


Performance improvements
------------------------

- Optimized ``SELECT DISTINCT .. LIMIT n`` queries. On high cardinality
  columns, these types of queries now execute up to 200% faster and use less
  memory.

- The optimizer now utilizes internal statistics to approximate the number of
  rows returned by various parts of a query plan. This should result in more
  efficient execution plans for joins.

- Reduced recovery time by sending file-chunks concurrently. This change only
  applies when transport communication is secured or compressed. The number of
  chunks is controlled by the :ref:`indices.recovery.max_concurrent_file_chunks
  <indices.recovery.max_concurrent_file_chunks>` setting.

- Added an optimization that allows ``WHERE`` clauses on top of derived tables
  containing :ref:`table functions <table-functions>` to run more efficiently
  in some cases.

- Allow user to control how table data is stored and accessed on a disk via the
  :ref:`store.type <sql-create-table-store-type>` table parameter and
  :ref:`node.store.allow_mmap <node.store_allow_mmap>` node setting.

- Changed the default table data store type from ``mmapfs`` to ``hybridfs``.


SQL Standard and PostgreSQL compatibility improvements
------------------------------------------------------


Window function extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added support for the :ref:`lag <window-functions-lag>` and :ref:`lead
  <window-functions-lead>` window functions as enterprise features.

- Added support for ``ROWS`` frame definitions in the context of window
  functions :ref:`window definitions <window-definition>`.

- Added support for the :ref:`named window definition
  <window-definition-named-windows>`.  This change allows a user to define a
  list of window definitions in the :ref:`WINDOW <sql-select-window>` clause
  that can be referenced in :ref:`OVER <sql-select-over>` clauses.

- Added support for ``offset PRECEDING`` and ``offset FOLLOWING`` :ref:`window
  definitions <window-definition>`.


Functions and operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added support for the :ref:`ALL <all_array_comparison>` operator for array
  and :ref:`subquery <gloss-subquery>` comparisons.

- Added a :ref:`PG_GET_KEYWORDS <pg_catalog.pg_get_keywords>` table function.

- Extended :ref:`CONCAT <scalar-concat>` to do implicit casts, so that calls
  like ``SELECT 't' || 5`` are supported.

- Added support for casting values of type ``object`` to ``text``. This casting
  will cause the object to be converted to a JSON string.

- Added support for casting to :ref:`data-types-geo`,
  :ref:`data-types-geo-shape` and :ref:`data-types-objects` array data types.

  For example::

      cast(['POINT(2 3)','POINT(1 3)'] AS array(geo_point))

- Added the :ref:`PG_TYPEOF <scalar-pg_typeof>` system function.

- Added the :ref:`INTERVAL <type-interval>` data type and extended
  :ref:`table-functions-generate-series` to work with timestamps and the new
  :ref:`INTERVAL <type-interval>` type.

- Added :ref:`LPAD <scalar-lpad>` and :ref:`RPAD <scalar-rpad>` scalar
  functions.

- Added the :ref:`LTRIM <scalar-ltrim>` and :ref:`RTRIM <scalar-rtrim>` scalar
  functions.

- Added :ref:`LEFT <scalar-left>` and :ref:`RIGHT <scalar-right>` scalar
  functions.

- Added :ref:`TIMEZONE <scalar-timezone>` scalar function.

- Added :ref:`AT TIME ZONE <type-timestamp-at-tz>` syntax.

- Added support for the operator :ref:`ILIKE <sql_dql_like>`, the case
  insensitive complement to ``LIKE``.

- Added support for CIDR notation comparisons through special purpose
  :ref:`operator <gloss-operator>` ``<<`` associated with type IP.

  Statements like ``192.168.0.0 << 192.168.0.1/24`` :ref:`evaluate
  <gloss-evaluation>` as true, meaning ``SELECT ip FROM ips_table WHERE ip <<
  192.168.0.1/24`` returns matching :ref:`IP addresses <type-ip>`.


New statements and clauses
--------------------------

- Added a :ref:`ANALYZE <analyze>` command that can be used to update
  statistical data about the contents of the tables in the CrateDB cluster.
  This data is visible in a newly added :ref:`pg_stats <pg_stats>` table.

- Added a :ref:`PROMOTE REPLICA <sql-alter-table-reroute>` subcommand to
  :ref:`sql-alter-table`.

- Added support for the filter clause in :ref:`aggregate expressions
  <aggregation-expressions>` and :ref:`window functions <window-function-call>`
  that are :ref:`aggregates <aggregation>`.

- Added support for using :ref:`ref-values` as a top-level relation.


Observability improvements
--------------------------

- Added a ``failures`` column to the :ref:`sys.snapshots <sys-snapshots>`
  table.

- Improved the error messages that were returned if a relation or schema is not
  found.

  The error messages may now include suggestions for similarly named tables,
  which should make typos more apparent and help users figure out they are
  missing double quotes (e.g., when a table name contains upper case letters).

- Added a ``seq_no_stats`` and a ``translog_stats`` column to the
  :ref:`sys.shards <sys-shards>` table.

- Added new system table :ref:`sys.segments <sys-segments>` which contains
  information about the Lucene segments of a shard.

- Added a ``node`` column to :ref:`sys.jobs_log <sys-logs>`.

- Statements containing limits, filters, :ref:`window functions
  <window-functions>`, or :ref:`table functions <table-functions>` will now be
  labelled accordingly in :ref:`sys-jobs-metrics`.


Others
------

- Changed the default for :ref:`sql-create-table-write-wait-for-active-shards`
  from ``ALL`` to ``1``. This update improves the out of the box experience by
  allowing a subset of nodes to become unavailable without blocking write
  operations. See the documentation linked above for more details about the
  implications.

- Added ``phonetic`` token filter with following encoders: ``metaphone``,
  ``double_metaphone``, ``soundex``, ``refined_soundex``, ``caverphone1``,
  ``caverphone2``, ``cologne``, ``nysiis``, ``koelnerphonetik``,
  ``haasephonetik``, ``beider_morse``, and ``daitch_mokotoff``.

- Removed a restriction for predicates in the ``WHERE`` clause involving
  :ref:`partitioned columns <gloss-partitioned-column>`, which could result in
  a failure response with the message: ``logical conjunction of the conditions
  in the WHERE clause which involve partitioned columns led to a query that
  can't be executed``.

- Support implicit object creation in update statements. For example, ``UPDATE
  t SET obj['x'] = 10`` will now implicitly set ``obj`` to ``{obj: {x: 10}}``
  on rows where ``obj`` was ``null``.

- Added the :ref:`sql-create-table-codec` parameter to :ref:`sql-create-table`
  to control the compression algorithm used to store data.

- The ``node`` argument of the :ref:`REROUTE <sql-alter-table-reroute>`
  commands of :ref:`sql-alter-table` can now either be the ID or the name of a
  node.

- Added support for the PostgreSQL array string literal notation.
