.. _version_4.2.2:

=============
Version 4.2.2
=============

Released on 2020-07-28.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.2.2.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.1 release before moving to
    4.2.2.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.1.7+ to 4.2.2 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.2.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.2 series.


Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that occasionally caused :ref:`EXPLAIN ANALYZE <ref-explain>`
  to return invalid query breakdown results or fail with the index out of
  bound exception.

- Fixed a regression that caused ``INSERT INTO`` statements in tables with a
  nested :ref:`CLUSTERED BY column <gloss-clustered-by-column>` to fail.

- Fixed a regression introduced in 4.2.0 that caused subscript lookups on
  ignored object columns to raise an error instead of a null value if the key
  doesn't exist.

- Fixed a performance regression introduced in 4.2.0 which caused queries with
  a ``ORDER BY`` but without ``LIMIT`` to execute slower than they used to.

- Fixed an issue that prevented queries executed using a ``query-then-fetch``
  strategy from being labelled correctly in the :ref:`sys.jobs_metrics
  <sys-jobs-metrics>` and :ref:`sys.jobs_log <sys-logs>` tables.

- Fixed a regression introduced in 4.2.0 which caused queries including a
  virtual table, and both a ``ORDER BY`` and ``LIMIT`` clause to fail.

- Fixed a regression introduced in 4.2.0 that resulted in ``NULL`` values being
  returned for :ref:`partition columns <gloss-partition-column>` instead of
  the actual values.

- Allow all users to execute ``DISCARD`` and ``SET TRANSACTION`` statement.
  These are session local statements and shouldn't require special privileges.

- Updated the bundled JDK to 14.0.2-12

- Increased the default interval for `stats.service.interval
  <stats.service.interval>` from one hour to 24 hours because invoking it every
  hour caused significant extra load on a cluster.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``SHOW CREATE TABLE`` to print columns of type
  ``VARCHAR(n)`` as ``TEXT``, leading to a loss of the length information when
  using the ``SHOW CREATE TABLE`` statement to re-create a table.

- Fixed an issue that prevented ``ALTER TABLE .. ADD COLUMN`` statements from
  working on tables containing a ``PRIMARY KEY`` column with a ``INDEX OFF``
  definition.
