.. _version_4.3.3:

=============
Version 4.3.3
=============

Released on 2021-01-06.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.3.3.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.2 release before moving to
    4.3.3.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.2.6+ to 4.3.3 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue in the PostgreSQL wire protocol that prevented values from
  being serialized correctly if the client didn't send a ``describe`` message
  and used the binary serialization format.

- Fixed an issue resulting in an error when using a ``ORDER BY`` clause inside
  the :ref:`subquery <gloss-subquery>` of a ``INSERT INTO`` statement.

- Fixed a regression introduced in CrateDB ``4.2.0`` leading to a NPE when
  copying data from one table to another using ``INSERT INTO ...`` while the
  source table contains more than 128 columns.

- Fixed an issue resulting in the full :ref:`generated expression
  <ddl-generated-columns-expressions>` as the column name inside data exported
  by ``COPY TO`` statements.

- Fixed an issue resulting double-quoted column names inside data exported by
  ``COPY TO`` statements.

- Fixed a memory leak in the DNS discovery seed provider. The memory leak
  occurred if you configured ``discovery.seed_providers=srv``.

- Fixed a regression introduced in CrateDB ``4.0`` preventing the global
  setting ``cluster.info.update.interval`` to be changed.

- Fixed handling of spaces in ``$CRATE_HOME``. Users would get a ``No such file
  or directory`` error if the path set via ``$CRATE_HOME`` contained spaces.
