.. _version_4.3.1:

=============
Version 4.3.1
=============

Released on 2020-10-29.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.3.1.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.2 release before moving to
    4.3.1.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.2.6+ to 4.3.1 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that could cause ``COPY`` or ``INSERT FROM QUERY`` operations
  to fail with a circuit breaking exception, even if more memory would've been
  available.

- Fixed an issue that would prevent function resolution for arguments that
  contain both text types with and without length limit. For example,
  statements as following would fail with the unknown function exception::

    CREATE TABLE tbl (str VARCHAR(3))
    SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE str = 'x'

- Improved the validation logic for ``CREATE TABLE`` and ``ALTER TABLE``
  statements to prevent users from creating tables that cannot be used due to
  an invalid schema definition.

- Changed the ``DROP TABLE`` logic to allow super users to drop tables with a
  corrupted schema.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to a ``IndexShardClosedException`` when
  querying the ``sys.shards`` table.

- Fixed an issue that led to a spike in the snapshot thread pool queue when
  taking snapshots.

- Fixed an issue that caused an error when a client using the PostgreSQL
  wire protocol is used to retrieve array values containing a escaped
  double quotes. For example, the JDBC client failed with ``Can't extract
  array data from JDBC array``.
