.. _version_4.3.0:

=============
Version 4.3.0
=============

Released on 2020-10-16.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.3.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.2 release before moving to
    4.3.0.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.2.6+ to 4.3.0 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Breaking Changes
================

- Added support for the ``g`` flag to function :ref:`regexp_matches
  <table-functions-regexp-matches>` and changed its type from :ref:`scalar
  <scalar-functions>` to :ref:`table <table-functions>`. It now returns a table
  where each row contains a single column ``groups`` of type ``array(text)``.

- Changed values of ``information_schema.columns.ordinal_position`` and
  ``pg_catalog.pg_attribute.attnum`` for ``object`` data type sub-columns from
  ``NULL`` to an incremented ordinal. Values of top-level columns may change if
  their position is after an ``object`` type column.


Deprecations
============

- Deprecated the ``*.overhead`` setting for all circuit breakers. It now
  defaults to 1.0 for all of them and changing it has no effect.

- Deprecated the :ref:`indices.breaker.fielddata.limit
  <indices.breaker.fielddata.limit>` and
  :ref:`indices.breaker.fielddata.overhead
  <indices.breaker.fielddata.overhead>` settings. These no longer have any
  effect as there is no fielddata cache anymore.


Changes
=======


Performance improvements
------------------------

- Improved the performance of aggregations in various use cases. In some
  scenarios we saw performance improvements by up to 70%.

- Changed the default for :ref:`soft deletes
  <sql-create-table-soft-deletes-enabled>`. Soft deletes are now enabled by
  default for new tables. This should improve the speed of recovery operations
  when replica shard copies were unavailable for a short period.


SQL Standard and PostgreSQL compatibility improvements
------------------------------------------------------

- Added scalar function :ref:`translate(string, from, to) <scalar-translate>`.

- Added support for :ref:`SET AND RESET SESSION AUTHORIZATION
  <ref-set-session-authorization>` SQL statements.

- Added scalar function :ref:`pg_get_function_result <scalar-pg_get_function_result>`.

- Added scalar function :ref:`pg_function_is_visible <scalar-pg_function_is_visible>`.

- Added table function :ref:`generate_subscripts
  <table-functions-generate-subscripts>`

- Added the :ref:`pg_catalog.pg_roles table <postgres-pg_catalog>`

- Added full support for quoted :ref:`subscript expressions <sql-subscripts>`
  like ``"myObj['x']"``.  This allows to use tools like PowerBI with tables
  that contain object columns.


Administration
--------------

- Added a new :ref:`cluster.max_shards_per_node <cluster.max_shards_per_node>`
  cluster setting that limits the amount of shards that can be created per
  node. Once the limit is reached, operations that would create new shards will
  be rejected.

- Added the ``read_only_allow_delete`` setting to the ``settings['blocks']``
  column of the :ref:`information_schema.tables <information_schema_tables>`
  and :ref:`information_schema.table_partitions <is_table_partitions>` tables.

- Changed :ref:`OPTIMIZE <sql-optimize>` to no longer implicitly refresh a
  table.

- Changed the privileges for ``KILL``, all users are now allowed to kill their
  own statements.

- Removed the Twitter tutorial from the Admin Console.


Error handling improvements
---------------------------

- Added detailed information on the error when a column with an undefined type
  is used to ``GROUP BY``.

- Added detailed information to possible errors on ``repository`` creation to
  give better insights on the root cause of the error.

- Changed the error code for the PostgreSQL wire protocol from ``XX000``
  ``internal_error`` when:

  - a user defined function is missing to ``42883`` ``undefined_function``
  - a column alias is ambiguous to ``42P09`` ``ambiguous_alias``
  - a schema name is invalid to ``3F000`` ``invalid_schema_name``
  - a column reference is ambiguous to ``42702`` ``ambiguous_column``
  - a relation exists already to ``42P07`` ``duplicate_table``
  - a column does not exist to ``42703`` ``undefined_column``
  - a relation does not exist to ``42P01`` ``undefined_table``
  - a document exists already to ``23505`` ``unique_violation``

- Changed the error code for dropping a missing view from the undefined 4040 to
  4041.

- Changed the error handling so it returns the error message and the related
  exception without being wrapped in a ``SqlActionException``. Error codes
  remain the same.
