.. _version_4.3.2:

=============
Version 4.3.2
=============

Released on 2020-11-25.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.3.2.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.2 release before moving to
    4.3.2.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.2.6+ to 4.3.2 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that could cause browsers to prompt for a client certificate
  if ``SSL`` is enabled on the server side, even if no cert authentication
  method is configured.

- Fixed a regression introduced in CrateDB ``4.1`` resulting in duplicated
  recovery file chunk responses sent. This causes log entries of ``Transport
  handler not found ...``.

- Fixed an issue that resulted in records in ``pg_catalog.pg_proc`` which
  wouldn't be joined with ``pg_catalog.pg_type``. Clients like ``npgsql`` use
  this information and without it, the users received an error like ``The CLR
  array type System.Int32[] isn't supported by Npgsql or your PostgreSQL`` if
  using array types.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to stuck ``INSERT INTO .. RETURNING`` queries.

- Fixed a regression introduced in CrateDB >= ``4.3`` which prevents using
  ``regexp_matches()`` wrapped inside a :ref:`subscript expression
  <sql-subscripts>` from being used as a ``GROUP BY`` expression.

  This fixed the broken Admin UI -> Monitoring tab as it uses such a statement.

- Fixed validation of ``GROUP BY`` :ref:`expressions <gloss-expression>` if an
  alias is used. The validation was by passed and resulted in an execution
  exception instead of an user friendly validation exception.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``IS NULL`` and ``IS NOT NULL`` :ref:`operators
  <gloss-operator>` on columns of type ``OBJECT`` with the column policy
  ``IGNORED`` to match incorrect records.

- Fixed an issue that led to an error like ``UnsupportedOperationException:
  Can't handle Symbol [ParameterSymbol: $1]`` if using ``INSERT INTO`` with a
  query that contains parameter place holders and a ``LIMIT`` clause.

- Fixed an issue that led to an error when nesting multiple :ref:`table
  functions <table-functions>`.
