.. _version_4.4.2:

=============
Version 4.4.2
=============

Released on 2021-03-02.

.. NOTE::

    If upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher before
    you upgrade to 4.4.2.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.3 release before moving to
    4.4.2.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.3.0+ to 4.4.2 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_4.4.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.4 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue in the error handling of ``CREATE REPOSITORY`` statements
  which could lead to a ``NullPointerException`` instead of a more meaningful
  error message.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to a ``Can't handle Symbol`` error when
  using views which are defined with column aliases.

- Fixed a regression that led to ``max`` aggregations on columns of type
  ``double precision`` or ``real`` to return ``null`` instead of ``0.0`` if all
  aggregated values are ``0.0``.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to an ``OutOfMemoryError`` when retrieving
  large result sets with large individual records.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to a ``NullPointerException`` when using a
  SELECT statement containing an INNER JOIN.

- Fixed an issue in the PostgreSQL wire protocol that would cause
  de-serialization of arrays to fail if they contained unquoted strings
  starting with digits.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to a serialization error when streaming values
  of the ``TIMESTAMP WITHOUT TIME ZONE`` type in text format using the
  PostgreSQL wire protocol.
