.. _version_4.5.1:

=============
Version 4.5.1
=============

Released on 2021-05-03.

.. NOTE::

    If upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher before
    you upgrade to 4.5.1.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.4 release before moving to
    4.5.1.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.4.0+ to 4.5.1 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_4.5.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.5 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that could cause queries on virtual tables to return an
  incorrect result if a table function is used in the select-list of a
  sub-query, but not used in the outputs of the parent relation. An example::

      SELECT name FROM (SELECT name, unnest(tags) FROM metrics) m;

- Updated the bundled JDK to 16.0.1+9

- Fixed an issue that would cause columns of type ``varchar`` with a length
  limited to be incorrectly casted to another type if used as argument in a
  function that has several type overloads.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``ALTER TABLE ADD COLUMN`` statements to remove
  constraints like analyzers or ``NOT NULL`` from existing columns in the same
  table.

- Allow executing ``CREATE TABLE .. AS`` as a regular user with ``DDL``
  permission on the target schema, and ``DQL`` permission on the source
  relations.

- Changed the ``RowDescription`` message that is sent to PostgreSQL clients to
  avoid that the JDBC client triggers queries against ``pg_catalog`` schema
  tables each time information from the ``MetaData`` of a ``ResultSet`` is
  accessed.

- Fixed ``crate-node`` auxiliary program to use the bundled Java runtime on
  Linux.
