.. _version_4.6.7:

=============
Version 4.6.7
=============

Released on 2022-01-18.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.6.7.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.3 release before moving to
    4.6.7.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.5.x to 4.6.7 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.6.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.6 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that caused the ``npgsql`` PostgreSQL client to fail with an
  ``System.Exception: Received unexpected backend message ParseComplete`` error
  if using the ``EntityFramework.Core`` framework to insert records.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to errors like ``Received resultset tuples,
  but no field structure for them`` when fetching a subset of rows from one
  query, and then intermediately triggering a different query before finishing
  the first query.

- Fixed an issue that could cause clients using the PostgreSQL wire protocol to
  receive row counts in incorrect orders when using APIs that allow to execute
  multiple statements in a batch.

- Fixed an issue that could cause inserts into partitioned tables to fail with
  a ``IndexNotFoundException`` if concurrently deleting partitions.

- Fixed a BWC translog issue for indices created with CrateDB < 3.2.

- Updated ``log4j`` to 2.17.1 because of `CVE-2021-45046
  <https://www.cve.org/CVERecord?id=CVE-2021-45046>`_ and `CVE-2021-45105
  <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2021-45105?s=09>`_. CrateDB isn't
  affected by default. The log4j configuration shipped with CrateDB doesn't
  include any of the problematic layout patterns. This is a pre-caution in case
  users changed the default configuration.
