.. _version_4.6.2:

=============
Version 4.6.2
=============

Released on 2021-08-26.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.6.2.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.3 release before moving to
    4.6.2.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.5.x to 4.6.2 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.6.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.6 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed a validation issue resulting in an unusable broken table when a
  sub-column identifier of an object type column contains invalid whitespace
  characters.

- Fixed an issue that could cause queries on ``sys.snapshots`` to fail with an
  error if a repository is in the cluster state that cannot be accessed - for
  example due to invalid credentials.

- Fixed a regression introduced in CrateDB `4.6.0` that broke the functionality
  of restoring only concrete custom metadata like ``USERS``, ``PRIVILEGES``,
  ``VIEWS`` and ``UDFS``.

- Fixed an issue that caused the ``SHOW TRANSACTION_ISOLATION`` statement to
  require privileges for the ``sys`` schema.

- Fixed an issue in the execution plan generation for ``SELECT COUNT(*) FROM
  ...`` statements with predicates like ``'a' in ANY(varchar_array_column)``.
  Such predicates resulted in a cast on the column (``'a' in
  ANY(varchar_array_column::array(varchar(1)))``), leading to poor performance
  because the indices couldn't get utilized. This fix significantly improves
  the performance of such queries. In a test over 100000 records, the query
  runtime improved from 320ms to 2ms.

- Fixed an issue that could cause a ``NullPointerException`` if a user invoked
  a ``SELECT`` statement with a predicate on a ``OBJECT (ignored)`` column
  immediately after a ``DELETE`` statement.

- Fixed an issue that could cause a wrong cast of numeric with parameters in
  arithmetical expressions.
