.. _version_4.6.0:

=============
Version 4.6.0
=============

Released on 2021-07-13.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.6.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.3 release before moving to
    4.6.0.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.5.x to 4.6.0 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Deprecations
============

- Deprecated the :ref:`node.max_local_storage_nodes
  <node.max_local_storage_nodes>` setting.


Changes
=======


Performance Improvements
------------------------

- Improved the performance of the :ref`hyperloglog_distinct
  <aggregation-hyperloglog-distinct>` aggregation function.

- Improved the performance of ``SELECT`` statements with ``WHERE`` conditions
  that are in the form of ``WHERE COL=COL``.

- Improved the performance of ``INSERT FROM query`` statements where the
  ``query`` contains a ``GROUP BY`` clause.

- Improved the internal throttling mechanism used for ``INSERT FROM QUERY`` and
  ``COPY FROM`` operations. This should lead to these queries utilizing more
  resources if the cluster can spare them.

- Added an optimization that improves the performance of ``count()``
  aggregations on object columns that have at least one inner column with a
  ``NOT NULL`` constraint.


SQL Statements and Compatibility
--------------------------------

- Added the :ref:`bit(n) <data-type-bit>` data type.

- CrateDB now accepts the ``START TRANSACTION`` statement for :ref:`PostgreSQL
  wire protocol <interface-postgresql>` compatibility. However, CrateDB does
  not support transactions and will silently ignore this statement.

- Added support for directory-level wild card expansion for URIs passed to
  ``COPY FROM`` statements.


New Scalars
-----------

- Added :ref:`array_to_string <scalar-array_to_string>` scalar function
  that concatenates array elements into a single string using a separator and
  an optional null-string.

- Added :ref:`array_min <scalar-array_min>` and :ref:`array_max
  <scalar-array_max>` scalar functions returning the minimal and maximal
  element in array respectively.

- Added the :ref:`array_sum <scalar-array_sum>` scalar function
  that returns the sum of all elements in an array.

- Added the :ref:`array_avg <scalar-array_avg>` scalar function that returns
  the average of all elements in an array.


Administration and Operations improvements
------------------------------------------

- Users can now read tables within the ``pg_catalog`` schema without explicit
  ``DQL`` permission. They will only see records the user has privileges on.

- Users with AL privileges (or DDL on both tables) can now run the following
  ALTER CLUSTER commands:
  ``ALTER CLUSTER SWAP TABLE source TO target``,
  ``ALTER CLUSTER REROUTE RETRY FAILED``,
  ``ALTER CLUSTER GC DANGLING ARTIFACTS``.

- Added support for encrypting node-to-node communication.

- Changed the privileges model to allow users with ``DDL`` privileges on a
  table to use the :ref:`OPTIMIZE TABLE <sql-optimize>` statement.

- Included the shard information for closed tables in ``sys.shards`` table.

- Added a ``closed`` column to :ref:`sys-shards <sys-shards>` exposing
  the state of the table associated with the shard.

- Added support for reading ``cgroup`` information in the ``cgroup v2`` format.

- Added support of hostnames in HBA configuration.


Administration Console
----------------------

- Removed all analytics (UDC, Segment)

- Removed the "Notifications" section in the statusbar

- Removed min-width for columns in console to reduce scrolling

- Changed syntax highlighting in console. Keywords in double quotes are now longer
  highlighted. Types are highlighted with a different color.

- Activated codemirror code hints for keywords.

- Changed the look of the Scrollbar to appear more modern.

- Added length limit for ``varchar(n)`` and ``bit(n)`` types in table view.
