.. _version_4.7.2:

=============
Version 4.7.2
=============

Released on 2022-04-28.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.7.2.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.6 release before moving to
    4.7.2.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.6.x to 4.7.2 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.7.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.7 series.

Fixes
=====

- Updated the bundled JDK to 17.0.3+7

- Fixed an issue with the handling of intervals in generated columns. The table
  creation failed when an interval is included in a function call as part of a
  generated column.

- Fixed an issue with the handling of quoted identifiers in column names where
  certain characters break the processing. This makes sure any special characters
  can be used as column name.

- Fixed a race condition that could cause a ``blocked by: [FORBIDDEN/4/Table or
  partition preparing to close`` error when inserting into a partitioned table
  where a single partition got closed.

- Fixed an issue that caused an ``Relation unknown`` error while trying to
  close an empty partitioned table using ``ALTER TABLE ... CLOSE``.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``COPY FROM RETURN SUMMARY`` fail non-gracefully
  in case of import from CSV containing invalid line(s).

- Bumped JNA library to version 5.10.0. This will make CrateDB start without
  JNA library warnings on M1 chip based MacOS systems.

- Updated to Admin UI 1.20.2, which fixes duplicate entries in query history.

- Fixed an issue that threw ``SQLParseException`` when a ``ILIKE`` operand
  contained '{' or '}'.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``ALTER TABLE ADD COLUMN`` to lose an optional
  ``routing_column`` information provided at table creation.
