.. _version_4.7.0:

=============
Version 4.7.0
=============

Released on 2022-01-25.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.7.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.3 release before moving to
    4.7.0.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.6.x to 4.7.0 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Deprecations
============

- Deprecated support for HDFS snapshot repositories.

- The :ref:`gateway.expected_nodes <gateway.expected_nodes>` cluster setting
  has been marked as deprecated and will be removed in CrateDB 5.0.
  The :ref:`gateway.expected_data_nodes <gateway.expected_data_nodes>` must be
  used instead.

- The :ref:`gateway.recover_after_nodes <gateway.recover_after_nodes>` cluster
  setting has been marked as deprecated and will be removed in CrateDB 5.0.
  The :ref:`gateway.recover_after_data_nodes <gateway.recover_after_data_nodes>`
  must be used instead.


Changes
=======


SQL Statements and Compatibility
--------------------------------

- Added support for the :ref:`END <ref-end>` statement for improved PostgreSQL
  compatibility.

- Added support to use an aggregation in an order-by clause without having
  them in the select list like ``select x from tbl group by x order by count(y)``

- Changed the type precedence rules for ``INSERT FROM VALUES`` statements. The
  target column types now take higher precedence to avoid errors in statements
  like ``INSERT INTO tbl (text_column) VALUES ('a'), (3)``. Here ``3``
  (``INTEGER``) used to take precedence, leading to a cast error because ``a``
  cannot be converted to an ``INTEGER``.

  This doesn't change the behavior of standalone ``VALUES`` statements.
  ``VALUES ('a'), (3)`` as a standalone statement will still fail.

- Introduced ``RESPECT NULLS`` and ``IGNORE NULLS`` flags to window function
  calls. The following window functions can now utilize the flags: ``LEAD``,
  ``LAG``, ``NTH_VALUE``, ``FIRST_VALUE``, and ``LAST_VALUE``.

- Added ``FAIL_FAST`` option to ``COPY FROM`` statement that when it is set to
  true, any errors observed while processing the statement will trigger an
  exception and the on-going executions will terminate in best effort.



Scalar and Aggregation Functions
--------------------------------

- Added the scalar function :ref:`array_append
  <scalar-array_append>` which adds a value at the end of an array

- Registered the scalar function :ref:`array_to_string
  <scalar-array_to_string>` under the `pg_catalog` schema.

- Added the scalar function :ref:`pg_encoding_to_char
  <scalar-pg_encoding_to_char>` which converts an PostgreSQL encoding's internal
  identifier to a human-readable name.

- Added the scalar function :ref:`age <scalar-pg-age>` which returns
  :ref:`interval <type-interval>` between 2 timestamps.

- Added the :ref:`date_bin <date-bin>` scalar function that truncates timestamp
  into specified interval aligned with specified origin.

- Added the :ref:`scalar-array_slice` scalar function.

- Added support for the array slice access expression ``anyarray[from:to]``.

- Added support of ``numeric`` type to the ``avg`` aggregation function.

- Added the :ref:`scalar-area` scalar function that calculates the area for a
  ``GEO_SHAPE``.

- Enabled the setting of most prototype methods for JavaScript Objects (e.g.
  Array.prototype, Object.prototype) in :ref:`user-defined functions <user-defined-functions>`


New Tables and Schema Extensions
--------------------------------

- Added an empty ``pg_catalog.pg_locks`` table for improved PostgreSQL
  compatibility.

- Added an empty ``pg_catalog.pg_indexes`` table for compatibility with
  PostgreSQL.

- Added a new ``table_partitions`` column to the :ref:`sys.snapshots
  <sys-snapshots>` table.

- Added the `column_details` column to the `information_schema.columns` table
  including the top level column name and path information of object elements.


Administration and Operations
-----------------------------

- Added a :ref:`sys node check for max shards per node
  <sys-node_checks_max_shards_per_node>` to verify that the amount of shards on the
  current node is less than 90 % of  :ref:`cluster.max_shards_per_node
  <cluster.max_shards_per_node>`. The check is exposed via :ref:`sys.node_checks
  <sys-node-checks>`.

- Added ``error_on_unknown_object_key`` session setting. This will either allow
  or suppress an error when unknown object keys are queried from dynamic
  objects.

- Enabled HTTP connections to preserve :ref:`session settings <conf-session>`
  across the requests as long as the connection is re-used.

  Note that connections are established on an individual node to node basis. If
  a client sends requests to different nodes, those won't share the same
  session settings, unless the client sets the session settings on each node
  individually.

- Improved the visual layout of the administration console: Remove dedicated
  "Monitoring" page and move its contents to the "Overview" page.


New Types
---------

- Added ``float4`` type as alias to ``real`` and ``float8`` type as alias to
  ``double precision``

- Added the :ref:`JSON type <data-type-json>`.


Performance
-----------

- Improved optimizer rewrite rules for outer join to inner joins rewrites.
  Previously using aliases could prevent the rewrite from working.

