.. _version_4.7.1:

=============
Version 4.7.1
=============

Released on 2022-03-10.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.7.1.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.6 release before moving to
    4.7.1.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.6.x to 4.7.1 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.7.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.7 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue from ``COPY FROM`` that caused the tables' default expressions
  to be evaluated only once, causing a single value to be used throughout the
  table instead of per row. This only affected non-deterministic functions such
  as ``gen_random_text_uuid()``, ``random()``, etc.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to errors when reading translog files from
  CrateDB versions < 4.0.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to an ``Couldn't create execution plan`` error
  when using a join condition referencing multiple other relations.

- Fixed an issue that caused an NPE when executing ``COPY FROM`` with a globbed
  URI having a parent directory that does not exist in the filesystem. This
  affected copying from filesystems local to CrateDB nodes only.

- Fixed an issue that led to an ``Invalid query used in CREATE VIEW`` error if
  using a scalar subquery within the query part of a ``CREATE VIEW`` statement.

- Fixed an issue that caused a failure when a window function over a partition
  is not used in an upper query. For example:
  ``select x from (select x, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY y) from t) t1``

- Fixed an incorrect optimization of comparison function arguments for explicit
  cast arguments resulting in a wrong result set. Example:
  ```WHERE strCol::bigint > 3```

- Updated the bundled JDK to 17.0.2+8
