.. _version_4.8.2:

=============
Version 4.8.2
=============

Released on 2022-07-11.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.8.2.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.7 release before moving to
    4.8.2.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.7.x to 4.8.2 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.8.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.8 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that caused queries reading values of type ``BIT`` to fail if
  the query contains a ``WHERE`` clause ``pk_col = ?`` condition.

- Fixed an issue in the serialization logic of the ``BIT`` type. This could
  cause issues with PostgreSQL clients using the text serialization mode.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``col IS NULL`` to match empty arrays.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``col IS NULL`` expressions to match rows where
  ``col`` is not ``null`` if ``col`` had ``INDEX OFF`` and ``STORAGE WITH
  (columnstore = false)`` set.

- Fixed an issue that caused queries with ``ORDER BY`` clause and ``LIMIT 0`` to
  fail.

- Fixed an issue that prevented rows inserted after the last refresh from
  showing up in the result if a shard had been idle for more than 30 seconds.
  This affected tables without an explicit ``refresh_interval`` setting.

- Fixed an issue that caused NPE to be thrown, instead of a user-friendly error
  message when ``NULL`` is passed as shardId for the
  ``ALTER TABLE XXX REROUTE XXX`` statements (MOVE, ALLOCATE, PROMOTE, CANCEL).

- Fixed an issue that caused queries operating on expressions with no defined
  type to fail. Examples are queries with ``GROUP BY`` on an ignored object
  column or ``UNION`` on ``NULL`` literals.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``GROUP BY`` and ``ORDER BY`` statements with
  ``NULL`` ordinal casted to a specific type, throw an error. Example:
  ``SELECT NULL, count(*) from unnest([1, 2]) GROUP BY NULL::integer``.

- Fixed an issue that not-null constraints used to be shown in the
  ``pg_constraint`` table which contradicts with PostgreSQL.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``IllegalArgumentException`` to be thrown when
  attempting to insert values into a partitioned table, using less columns than
  the ones defined in the table's ``PARTITIONED BY`` clause.

- Fixed an issue that caused failure of ``ALTER TABLE`` statements when updating
  dynamic or non-dynamic table settings on closed tables.

- Fixed an issue that caused clients using PostrgreSQL wire protocol's simple
  query to hang, when an error occurred during planning.

- Fixed casts of ``TEXT`` to ``REGCLASS`` data types which were resulting in
  wrong ``REGCLASS`` values as the  ``current_schema`` was not taken into
  account.

- Fixed an issue which caused ``PRIMARY KEY`` columns to be shown
  as nullable in the ``pg_catalog.pg_attribute`` table.

- Fixed possible infinitive loops on ``COPY FROM`` statements if an IO error
  happen while trying to read lines from an URI.

- Fixed an issue that caused :ref:`ARRAY_LENGTH <scalar-array_length>` in
  combination with a ``greater than `` (``>``) comparison to exclude rows if an
  array contained duplicates or nulls.