.. _version_4.8.1:

=============
Version 4.8.1
=============

Released on 2022-05-24.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 4.8.1.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.7 release before moving to
    4.8.1.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.7.x to 4.8.1 is supported.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_4.8.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
4.8 series.

Fixes
=====

- Enabled users to alter settings on tables subscribed in a logical replication.

- Enabled to alter the setting ``blocks.read_only_allow_delete`` on blob tables
  to make it possible to drop read-only blob tables.

- Fixed an issue that could cause queries on ``sys.snapshots`` to get stuck and
  consume a significant amount of resources.

- Fixed an issue with primary key columns that have a ``DEFAULT`` clause. That
  could lead to queries on the primary key column not matching the row.

- Fixed an issue with the logical replication of tables metadata which caused
  to stop if the master node of the subscriber changed.

- Fixed an issue with aliased sub-relation outputs when used inside the outer
  where clause expression, resulting in a planner error. Example:
  ``SELECT * FROM (SELECT id, true AS a FROM t1) WHERE a``

- Fixed an edge case with the initial restore of subscribed tables when the
  restore operation finish almost instantly (e.g. restoring small tables).

- Fixed an issue with table functions parameter binding in ``SELECT`` queries
  without ``FROM`` clause. Example: ``SELECT unnest(?)``.

- Improved error handling when creating a subscription with unknown
  publications. Instead of successfully creating the subscription, an error
  is now presented to the user.

- Fixed an issue with client caching which lead to authentication error when
  creating a subscription with bad credentials and ``pg_tunnel`` followed by
  re-creating it second time with the same name and valid credentials.

- Fixed an issue with ``VARCHAR`` and ``BIT`` columns with a length
  limited used in primary key, generated or default column expression. An
  ``ALTER TABLE`` statement removed the length limit from such columns.

- Fixed an issue resulting in a broken subscription when a subscription is
  dropped and re-created within a short period of time.
