.. _version_5.0.1:

=============
Version 5.0.1
=============

Released on 2022-09-06.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.0.1.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.8 release before moving to
    5.0.1.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.8.x to 5.0.1 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_5.0.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.0 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed a regression introduced in CrateDB ``4.3.0`` causing an
  ``IndexOutOfBoundsException`` when applying aggregations on literals.
  Example::

    SELECT SUM(10) FROM test HAVING COUNT(1) > 0

- Fixed an issue, preventing users from defining a constraint on a generated
  column, when creating a table or when adding a generated column. Example::

    CREATE TABLE test(
        col1 INT,
        col2 INT GENERATED ALWAYS AS col1*2 CHECK (col2 > 0)
    )

- Fixed an issue causing ``IndexOutOfBoundsException`` to be thrown when using
  ``LEFT``/``RIGHT`` or ``FULL`` ``OUTER JOIN`` and one of the tables (or
  sub-selects) joined has 0 rows.

- Updated the bundled JDK from 18.0.1+10 to 18.0.2+9.

- Fixed a race condition that could cause a ``INSERT INTO`` operation to get
  stuck.

- Fixed an issue that could cause queries with ``objectColumn = ?`` expressions
  to fail if the object contains inner arrays.

- Fixed a ``NullPointerException`` when using a ``IS NULL`` expression on an
  object column that just had a child column added.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``array_upper`` and ``array_lower`` scalar
  functions return wrong results on multidimensional arrays.

- Fixed exposure of the correct version a partitioned table was created on at
  the ``information_schema.tables.version.created`` column for newly created
  partitioned tables. This won't fix it for existing tables as the version
  information the table was created with was not stored and such is not
  known. The issue doesn't affect the version exposed for individual partitions.

- Fixed a column positions issue that caused an ``INSERT`` or any other
  statements that adds columns dynamically to throw an exception.

- Updated the Admin UI to version 1.22.2. It includes a fix for a rendering
  issue causing jumping behavior on selected views in view list.

- Fixed ``UPDATE``, ``INSERT`` and ``COPY FROM`` to preserve the implied column
  order when columns are added.

- Fixed casts of strings to the ``DATE`` type, any possible time parts
  of a timestamp formatted will be ignored instead of raising a cast error.

- Fixed casts of numeric and timestamp values to the ``DATE`` type, any time
  values weren't removed from the returning epoch in milliseconds.

- Fixed an issue causing error when adding a check constraint to a nested
  object sub column.
