.. _version_5.0.0:

=============
Version 5.0.0
=============

Released on 2022-07-11.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.0.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 4.8 release before moving to
    5.0.0.

    A rolling upgrade from 4.8.x to 5.0.0 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Breaking Changes
================

- Updated Lucene to the version `9.2.0`_.

- Changed the type of :ref:`TIMESTAMP <type-timestamp>` from :ref:`TIMESTAMP WITH
  TIME ZONE <type-timestamp-with-tz>` to :ref:`TIMESTAMP WITHOUT TIME ZONE
  <type-timestamp-without-tz>` to be compatible with the SQL standard.

  Tables created prior to updating to CrateDB 5.0 will remain unchanged. Tables
  created after updating to 5.0 while using the ``TIMESTAMP`` alias will use
  ``TIMESTAMP WITHOUT TIME ZONE``. Change the type definition to ``TIMESTAMP
  WITH TIME ZONE`` if you want to preserve the old behavior.

- Creating tables with soft deletes disabled is no longer supported.
  The setting ``soft_deletes.enabled`` will always be set to ``true`` and
  removed in CrateDB 6.0.

- Removed deprecated ``node.max_local_storage_nodes`` setting. Set different
  :ref:`path.data <path.data>` values to run multiple CrateDB processes on the
  same machine.

- Removed deprecated ``delimited_payload_filter`` built-in token filter which
  has been renamed to ``delimited_payload`` since CrateDB 3.2.0.

- Removed ``simplefs`` store type as a follow-up of its removal in Lucene
  9.0.0. Refer to :ref:`store types <sql-create-table-store-type>` for
  alternatives.

- Changed the default column name for the ``generate_series``,
  ``regexp_matches`` and ``unnest`` table functions. Previously they'd default
  to ``col1`` as column name. The behavior changed to use the table function's
  name as column name unless the function returns more than one column. Some
  examples:

  1. ``cr> SELECT * FROM generate_series(1, 2);``

     This used to return a column named ``col1`` and now returns a column named
     ``generate_series``.

  2. ``cr> SELECT * FROM generate_series(1, 2) as numbers;``

     This used to return a column named ``col1`` and now returns a column named
     ``numbers``.

  To ease migration, we added a new setting
  (:ref:`legacy.table_function_column_naming
  <legacy.table_function_column_naming>`.) to opt-out of this new behavior.

- Fields of type ``pg_node_tree`` in PostgreSQL in the ``pg_class`` and
  ``pg_index`` tables now return ``TEXT`` instead of ``ARRAY(OBJECT)`` for
  improved compatibility with PostgreSQL.

- The single byte ``byte`` data type was falsely exposed as the ``char``
  data type. It will now be correctly exposed as the special single byte
  ``"char"``.

Deprecations
============

- Deprecated the azure discovery functionality. It only works for classic VM and
  Microsoft deprecated classic VM support on Azure.


Changes
=======

SQL Statements
--------------

- Added support for non-recursive :ref:`sql_dql_with`.

- Added support for using subscript expressions on top of aliases within the
  ``ORDER BY`` clause. An example: ``SELECT percentile(x, [0.90, 0.95]) AS
  percentiles FROM tbl ORDER BY percentiles[1]``.

- Added support for array element access on top of a subscript on an object
  array. An example: ``object_array['subelement'][1]``

- Added support for casts from ``bigint`` to ``regclass`` for improved
  compatibility with PostgreSQL clients.

- Added support for ``FETCH [FIRST | NEXT] <noRows> [ROW | ROWS] ONLY`` clause
  as and alternative to the ``LIMIT`` clause.

- Allowed ``LIMIT`` and ``OFFSET`` clauses to be declared in any order, i.e.:
  ``SELECT * FROM t LIMIT 10 OFFSET 5`` or
  ``SELECT * FROM t OFFSET 5 LIMIT 10``.

- Added support for ``LIMIT NULL``, ``LIMIT ALL``, ``OFFSET NULL``,
  ``OFFSET 10 ROW`` and ``OFFSET 10 ROWS``.

- Added support for using ``NULL`` literals in a ``UNION`` without requiring an
  explicit cast.

- Changed ``UNION`` to support implicit casts if the type of expressions in the
  first relation don't match the types in the second relation.

New Types
---------

- Added full support, incl. storage and indexing, for the fixed-length,
  blank padded :ref:`data-type-character` data type. Previously, the single
  byte ``byte`` was exposed as ``char`` which has been fixed, see
  `Breaking Changes`_.

- Added ``decimal`` type as alias to ``numeric``


SQL Standard And PostgreSQL Schema Compatibility
------------------------------------------------

- Added ``typsend`` column to ``pg_catalog.pgtype`` table for improved
  compatibility with PostgreSQL.

- Added primary key and check constraint column positions into ``conkey`` field
  of the ``pg_constraint`` table for improved compatibility with PostgreSQL.

- Added ``pg_catalog.pg_tables`` and ``pg_catalog.pg_views`` tables for improved
  PostgreSQL compatibility.

- Added identity columns information to ``information_schema.columns`` table for
  improved PostgreSQL compatibility. CrateDB does not support identity columns.

- Added an empty ``pg_catalog.pg_shdescription`` table for improved PostgreSQL
  compatibility.

Scalar Functions
----------------

- Added ``SUBSTRING`` to the non-reserved SQL keywords in order to support the
  generic function call syntax for improved PostgreSQL compatibility. Example:
  ``SUBSTRING('crate', 1, 3)``

- Added the :ref:`concat_ws <scalar-concat-ws>` scalar function which allows
  concatenation with a custom separator.

- Added the :ref:`object_keys <scalar-object_keys>` scalar function which returns
  the set of first level keys of an ``object``.

- Added the :ref:`pg_get_serial_sequence <scalar-pg_get_serial_sequence>` scalar
  function for improved compatibility with PostgreSQL. CrateDB does not support
  sequences.

- Added :ref:`has_schema_privilege <scalar-has-schema-priv>` scalar function
  which checks whether user (or current user if not specified) has specific
  privilege(s) for the specific schema.

- Added support for an optional boolean argument ``pretty`` at the
  :ref:`pg_get_expr <scalar-pg_get_expr>` scalar function for improved
  PostgreSQL compatibility.

- Added the :ref:`pg_get_partkeydef <scalar-pg_get_partkeydef>` scalar
  function for improved compatibility with PostgreSQL. Partitioning in CrateDB
  is different from PostgreSQL, therefore this function always returns ``NULL``.

- Moved the :ref:`scalar-quote_ident` function to ``pg_catalog`` for improved
  compatibility with PostgreSQL.


Performance Improvements
------------------------

- Added an optimization to push down constant join conditions to the relation
  in an inner join, which results in a more efficient execution plan.

- Added an optimization for ``array_column = []`` queries.

Administration and Operations
-----------------------------

- Updated the bundled JDK to 18.0.1+10

- Users with AL privileges can now run ``ANALYZE``

- Updated the Admin UI. It includes a new color, new colors and no longer loads
  resources like web fonts from external services.

.. _9.2.0: https://lucene.apache.org/core/9_2_0/changes/Changes.html

