.. _version_5.1.3:

=============
Version 5.1.3
=============

Released on 2023-01-11.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.1.3.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.0 release before moving to
    5.1.3.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.0.x to 5.1.3 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_5.1.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.1 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that led to table not being dropped when
  :ref:`swapping two tables <alter_cluster_swap_table>` with
  ``drop_source = true``, when either or both source and target tables were
  partitioned.

- Fixed an issue that allowed users without the related privileges to check
  other users' privileges by calling
  :ref:`has_schema_privilege <scalar-has-schema-priv>` function.

- Fixed an issue that prevented :ref:`UDFs <user-defined-functions>` from
  accessing nested objects.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``SELECT *`` statements to fail if a table has an
  object with inner ``null`` object and a sibling column with the same name with
  one of the sub-columns. An example::

    CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS "t" (
      "obj1" OBJECT(DYNAMIC) AS (
       "target" text,
       "obj2" OBJECT(DYNAMIC) AS (
          "target" REAL
       )
      )
    );
    INSERT INTO t VALUES ('{"obj2": null, "target": "Sensor"}');
    SELECT * FROM t;

- Fixed an issue that caused :ref:`swap table <alter_cluster_swap_table>` to
  accept invalid table names provided in a double-quoted string format
  containing ``.`` such as ``"table.t"`` by mis-interpreting it as
  ``"table"."t"``, which is a two double-quoted strings joined by a ``.``.

- Fixed an issue that caused failure of the statements containing comparison of
  :ref:`bit <data-type-bit>` strings with different length. An example::

     SELECT B'01' = B'1'

- Fixed an issue that caused failures of queries joining a table to a virtual
  table where virtual table is another ``JOIN`` on aliased column and having a
  ``LIMIT`` clause. An example::

     CREATE TABLE t1 (x INTEGER, i INTEGER);
     CREATE TABLE t2 (y INTEGER);

     SELECT * from GENERATE_SERIES(1, 2)
     CROSS JOIN
       (SELECT t1.i, t2.y AS aliased from t1 inner join t2 on t1.x = t2.y) v
     LIMIT 10

