.. _version_5.10.11:

===============
Version 5.10.11
===============

Released on 2025-07-14.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.10.11.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.9 release before moving to
    5.10.11.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.9.x to 5.10.11 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. WARNING::

    *(Added on 2025-08-07)*

    Version 5.10.11 has critical known issues. If you haven't updated to
    5.10.11 yet, it is recommended to skip 5.10.11 and move to 5.10.12 directly.

    -   Replication errors due to the ``seqNo`` and ``primaryTerm``
        information missing when replicating new records written as part of
        ``INSERT INTO`` or ``COPY FROM`` statements from the primary to
        replica shards when running in a mixed cluster with 5.10.11 and an
        earlier version.

    -   A regression introduced with 5.10.11 that caused values of
        undeterministic ``DEFAULT`` and ``GENERATED`` columns to be ``NULL``
        (instead of having generated values) when using ``UPDATE`` or
        ``INSERT... ON CONFLICT...`` statements.

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_5.10.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.10 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that allowed to :ref:`CREATE tables <ddl-create-table>` with
  more columns than the limit defined by the
  :ref:`sql-create-table-mapping-total-fields-limit` setting.

- Fixed an issue that would prevent the
  :ref:`cluster.routing.allocation.awareness.attributes` and
  :ref:`cluster.routing.allocation.awareness.force.\*.values` to be shown under
  the ``settings`` column of the :ref:`sys-cluster` table.

- Fixed an issue that wrongly allowed columns of tables created by
  :ref:`logical replication <administration-logical-replication>` subscriptions
  to be renamed, dropped or added.

- Fixed an issue that wrongly allowed tables created by
  :ref:`logical replication <administration-logical-replication>` publications
  to be :ref:`swapped<alter_cluster_swap_table>`.

- Fixed an issue that could cause streaming errors, leading to shard failures
  and re-replication if using ``INSERT INTO`` statements with ``ON CONFLICT``
  clause combined with bulk requests if some operations ran into a conflict
  while others didn't.

- Fixed an issue that caused analysis errors of SQL batch/bulk statements to be
  wrongly reported as runtime errors, resulting in an error per batch instead of
  a single error for the whole batch operation. Both client interfaces,
  :ref:`HTTP<interface-http>` and :ref:`PG<interface-postgresql>`, are affected.

- Fixed an issue which caused inserts of object arrays with columns having
  mixed types to partially fail. It used the type of the first value seen, and
  failed for the values with a different type.
  The new behavior is that it will use the type with the higher precendence,
  and cast the other values if possible.

- Fixed incorrect JSON response formatting for bulk operations with a single
  argument that results in a runtime error. The response now follows the
  structure specified in :ref:`bulk-errors <http-bulk-errors>`.

- Fixed an issue that caused a user to have duplicate roles granted by
  different grantors.

- Fixed an issue that prevented the superuser ``crate`` from revoking granted
  roles.
