.. _version_5.10.10:

===============
Version 5.10.10
===============

Released on 2025-06-30.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.10.10.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.9 release before moving to
    5.10.10.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.9.x to 5.10.10 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_5.10.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.10 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that would cause error to be thrown when selecting a column
  of :ref:`type-timestamp-without-tz` or :ref:`type-timestamp-with-tz` for
  which, the :ref:`ddl-storage-columnstore` is disabled.

- Fixed a race condition that could lead to ``INSERT INTO`` statements with a
  ``ON CONFLICT`` clause to either take much longer than necessary or get stuck
  unless other activity caused cluster change events.

- Fixed an issue that caused queries with aggregations to get stuck under
  memory pressure.

- Fixed an issue that caused RAM under-accounting, potentially leading to an
  ``OutOfMemoryError`` when result sets contained numeric values with large
  digit counts. The issue affected ``HTTP`` requests only.

- Fixed an issue that caused queries with aggregations to continue despite
  ``CircuitBreakerException`` being thrown and return incorrect (partial)
  results under memory pressure.

- Fixed the table parameter namings of the :ref:`ref-show-create-table`
  statement output, some parameters were wrongly prefixed with
  ``index.``.

- Fixed an issue that caused analysis errors of SQL batch/bulk statements to be
  wrongly reported as runtime errors, resulting in an error per batch instead of
  a single error for the whole batch operation. Both client interfaces,
  :ref:`HTTP<interface-http>` and :ref:`PG<interface-postgresql>`, are affected.
