.. _version_5.10.5:

==============
Version 5.10.5
==============

Released on 2025-04-28.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.10.5.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.9 release before moving to
    5.10.5.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.9.x to 5.10.5 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_5.10.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.10 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed memory estimation for ``INSERT INTO`` statements with ``ON CONFLICT``
  clause. This should help prevent nodes from running out of memory.

- Improved the handling of ``statement_timeout`` to reduce memory consumption.
  Before it would consume extra memory per executed query for the full
  ``statement_duration`` even if the query finished early. Now the memory is
  released once a query finishes.

- Fixed an issue that prevented ``MATCH (geo_shape_column, ...)`` from matching
  any records if ``geo_shape_column`` is a generated column.

- Fixed a race condition that could lead to a memory leak if nodes within the
  cluster were temporarily not reachable.

- Fixed an issue that led to an ``no viable alternative at input 'SELECT FROM'``
  error when using ``SELECT count(*) FROM remote_tbl`` where ``remote_tbl`` is a
  foreign table using the JDBC foreign data wrapper.

- Fixed edge cases of fixed length character comparisons involving whitespaces,
  E.g.::

    CREATE TABLE t (col CHAR(3))
    INSERT INTO t VALUES ('')
    SELECT col > e'\n' from t
    
  now returns ``TRUE`` because ``''`` is padded with ``' '`` which is ``32`` in
  ``ASCII`` and ``e'\n'`` is ``10`` in ``ASCII``.

- Fixed behavior of ``COPY ... FROM ... with (fail_fast = true)`` to stop on
  non-retryable IO errors as well. Before the flag used to be applied only for
  write errors.
