.. _version_5.2.2:

=============
Version 5.2.2
=============

Released on 2023-02-09.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.2.2.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.1 release before moving to
    5.2.2.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.1.x to 5.2.2 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_5.2.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.2 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed ``crate-node`` cli tool to work without asking for ``path.home`` and/or
  ``path.conf`` parameters when run from inside the ``CrateDB`` distribution
  directory, for Linux, MacOSX and Windows environments.

- Removed the automatic fix mechanism, introduced in
  :ref:`5.2.1 <version_5.2.1>`, for corrupted metadata due to table swap
  statements like::

    ALTER CLUSTER SWAP TABLE "myschema"."mytable" TO "myschema.mytable";

  and provide a manual way to fix such issues by running::

    bin/crate-node fix-metadata


- Changed the ``typsend`` and ``typreceive`` values in the
  ``pg_catalog.pg_type`` table to match PostgreSQL for improved compatibility.
  Clients like ``Postgrex`` depend on this.

- Fixed a race condition that could lead to an error reporting that a partition
  was not found when running ``DELETE FROM <table> WHERE partition_column = ?``
  statements.

- Fixed runtime ``ClassCastException`` when attempting to
  :ref:`ORDER BY <sql-select-order-by>` an :ref:`INTERVAL <type-interval>` type,
  or when attempting to use :ref:`MIN <aggregation-min>` or
  :ref:`MAX <aggregation-max>` aggregations on an
  :ref:`INTERVAL <type-interval>` type, and return an error message about
  unsupported type during analysis of a query.

- Disallowed comparison operators between :ref:`INTERVAL <type-interval>` types,
  except for ``=`` and ``<>``, Previously, ``null`` was returned in any of the
  ``>``, ``>=``, ``<``, ``<=``, comparisons.
