.. _version_5.2.6:

=============
Version 5.2.6
=============

Released on 2023-04-04.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.2.6.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.1 release before moving to
    5.2.6.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.1.x to 5.2.6 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated



.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_5.2.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.2 series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that prevented PostgreSQL wire protocol clients from being able
  to ``describe`` the query of a cursor created using ``DECLARE``. An example of
  a client that uses the functionality is ``psycopg3``. A snippet like the
  following failed::

    import psycopg
    conn = psycopg.connect("host=localhost port=5432 user=crate")
    cur = conn.cursor(name="foo")
    cur.execute("select 1")
    for row in cur.fetchall():
        print(row)

- Fixed an issue in the PostgreSQL wire protocol implementation that could
  prevent protocol level fetch from working correctly with some clients. An
  example client is `pg-cursor <https://www.npmjs.com/package/pg-cursor>`_.

- Fixed a performance regression for queries that used a scalar sub-query in the
  ``WHERE`` which itself also filtered on columns in a ``WHERE`` without
  selecting those columns. An example::

    SELECT name FROM users
      WHERE id IN (SELECT user_id FROM hits WHERE ts > '2023-01-01')

- Fixed an issue that a wrong HTTP response was sent, when trying to ``POST`` to
  an invalid URL, causing the HTTP client to stall.

- Fixed response for HTTP ``GET`` request to not expose internal paths when the
  requested URL doesn't exist.

- Fixed default behaviour for :ref:`CURSOR <sql-declare>`'s
  :ref:`SCROLL <sql-declare-scroll>`. When neither ``SCROLL`` nor ``NO SCROLL``
  is provided in the statement, ``NO SCROLL`` is now assumed.

- Fixed a race condition that could lead to a ``ShardNotFoundException`` when
  executing ``UPDATE`` statements.

- Fixed an issue that caused a subset of a ``WHERE`` clause to be lost from a
  ``JOIN`` statement. The first trigger condition was using a column by itself
  as a boolean expression. For example from ``WHERE NOT b AND c`` the column
  ``c`` representing a boolean expression ``c = TRUE`` overrode ``NOT b``. The
  second trigger condition was :ref:`MATCH predicate <predicates_match>`
  which also overrode preceding ``WHERE`` conditions.

- Fixed an issue that caused a ``ColumnUnknownException`` when creating a table
  with a ``generated column`` involving a subscript expression with a root
  column name containing upper cases.
  An example::

    CREATE TABLE t ("OBJ" OBJECT AS (intarray int[]), firstElement AS "OBJ"['intarray'][1]);
    ColumnUnknownException[Column obj['intarray'] unknown]

- Fixed a ``NullPointerException`` which occurs when using NULL as a setting
  value.

- Fixed a resource leak that could happen when inserting data which causes
  constraints violation or parsing errors.
