.. _version_5.4.4:

=============
Version 5.4.4
=============

Released on 2023-10-13.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.4.4.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.3 release before moving to
    5.4.4.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.3.x to 5.4.4 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_5.4.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.4 series.


Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that led to file not found errors when trying to restore a
  snapshot that was taken after a table had been swapped. A new snapshot
  must be taken to apply the fix and solve the issue.

- Fixed an issue that caused nested accesses to ``ignored`` objects with
  unknown object keys from returning non ``nulls``. e.g.::

    SELECT o['a']['unknown'] FROM t;

  returning the value for ``o['a']`` instead of a ``null``.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``IS NULL`` predicate to be ineffective on
  sub-columns of ``ignored`` object types.

- Fixed an issue that caused the output object column of ``UNION`` on object
  columns to contain only the sub-columns of the object column from the right
  hand side. With this fix, the output object column will contain the
  merged sub-columns of the respective objects of both relations.

- Fixed a regression introduced with CrateDB 5.3.1 which caused a
  ``NullPointerException`` when creating a repository on S3 with authentication
  provided by IAM role attached to the EC2 instance running the CrateDB node.

- Fixed an issue which led to skipping duplicate column check, in
  ``CREATE TABLE`` statements, if duplicate columns have the same type.

- Fixed an issue with missing validation on ``INSERT`` statement, allowing to
  specify duplicate target columns.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``UPDATE`` statements, invoked immediately after a
  ``DELETE`` statement, which empties a table, to show an error.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``CASE`` expressions to throw
  ``UnsupportedFeatureException`` when ``null`` values are returned for one or
  more conditions. e.g.::

    SELECT CASE col1
      WHEN 'value1' THEN 1
      WHEN 'value2' THEN NULL
      WHEN 'value3' THEN 3
      ELSE NULL
    END
    FROM (SELECT 'value1' AS col1) a;

- Fixed an issue that caused :ref:`column policy <type-object-column-policy>`
  of object types created by ``CREATE TABLE AS`` to be overridden to
  ``strict``.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``RETURNING`` clause, referring to
  non-deterministic ``GENERATED`` or ``DEFAULT`` columns, return a value, not
  equal to the actually persisted one.

- Fixed an issue that caused storing inconsistent values on primary and
  replica for ``GENERATED`` or ``DEFAULT`` columns, using non-deterministic
  functions, returning different values even within the scope of a single
  query. e.g.:: ``gen_random_text_uuid`` and ``random``. Functions like
  ``NOW`` or ``CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`` are unaffected by this issue.

- Fixed an issue that caused privileges checks to be bypassed when using scalar
  sub-selects in various clauses of a query: ``SELECT``, ``WHERE``, ``HAVING``,
  etc.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``any`` operators such as ``!= any``,
  ``not like any`` or range operators like ``< any`` to throw
  ``NullPointerExceptions`` or return invalid results when the left hand side
  argument is a column and the right hand side argument array contains at
  least one ``null``.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``(I)LIKE ANY`` operators to fail with an exception
  when comparing non-string expressions.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``IS NULL`` operators to raise an error if the
  column had the column store disabled.
