.. _version_5.4.5:

==========================
Version 5.4.5 - Unreleased
==========================

.. comment 1. Remove the " - Unreleased" from the header above and adjust the ==
.. comment 2. Remove the NOTE below and replace with: "Released on 20XX-XX-XX."
.. comment    (without a NOTE entry, simply starting from col 1 of the line)
.. NOTE::

    In development. 5.4.5 isn't released yet. These are the release notes for
    the upcoming release.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.4.5.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.3 release before moving to
    5.4.4.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.3.x to 5.4.5 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_5.4.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.4 series.


Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that led to ``Received resultset tuples, but no field structure
  for them`` errors in clients using the PostgreSQL wire protocol, if a query
  was triggered after another query was suspended and left unconsumed.

- Fixed an issue that led to ``Couldn't create execution plan from logical plan
  ..`` errors when trying to use a correlated join in the ``WHERE`` clause of a
  query with a join. For example::

    SELECT
        n.nspname AS schema,
        t.typname AS typename,
        t.oid::int4 AS typeid
    FROM
        pg_type t
        LEFT JOIN pg_catalog.pg_namespace n ON n.oid = t.typnamespace
    WHERE
        EXISTS (
            SELECT 1 FROM pg_catalog.pg_type el WHERE el.oid = t.typelem);

- Fixed an issue that prevented namespaces from showing up in
  ``pg_catalog.pg_namespace`` if a user had privileges on a table within a
  schema, but no privileges on the schema itself.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``UNION`` to throw ``SQLParseExceptions`` instead
  of ``AmbiguousColumnExceptions``, when 2 or more columns are assigned the
  same name. e.g.::

    SELECT a FROM (SELECT a, b AS a FROM t UNION SELECT 1, 1) t2;
    -- selecting 'a' from 't2' is ambiguous since there are 'a' and 'b AS a'

- Fixed a regression introduced with CrateDB :ref:`version_5.3.0` that may
  cause ``INSERT INTO ... ON CONFLICT .. `` queries to fail with unexpected
  errors or even updating wrong sub-columns when using a sub-column expression
  in the ``ON CONFLICT`` clause.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``UNION`` to return wrong results or throw
  ``SQLParseException`` when the output columns had identical names which were
  from tables that were aliased. e.g.::

    SELECT * FROM (SELECT t1.a, t2.a FROM t AS t1, t AS t2) t3 UNION SELECT 1, 1;

  where ``t1.a`` and ``t2.a`` are from aliased tables that also have identical
  names, ``a``.

- Fixed a regression, introduced in :ref:`version_4.2.0` which caused wrong
  :ref:`HTTP error code <http-error-codes>` to be returned, when some internal
  issue occurred during the creation of execution plan for a query, e.g.: shards
  of a table involved in the query become unavailable.

- Fixed an issue that caused the properties of a ``INDEX using`` clause within
  a type definition for ``ARRAY(GEO_SHAPE)`` in a ``CREATE TABLE`` statement to
  be ignored.

