.. _version_5.4.1:

=============
Version 5.4.1
=============

Released on 2023-08-04.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.4.1.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.3 release before moving to
    5.4.1.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    A rolling upgrade from 5.3.x to 5.4.1 is **not** supported if your cluster
    contains view definitions.
    If you want to do a rolling upgrade, skip 5.4.1 and upgrade to 5.4.2.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

See the :ref:`version_5.4.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the
5.4 series.

Known Issues
============

- Version 5.0.0 introduced a regression which can cause some ``JOIN`` queries
  to return no results when the query optimizer re-orders the joined tables.
  As a workaround, users should apply the following session settings before
  running such queries to prevent the query optimizer from re-ordering them
  and therefore produce the correct results:

  On CrateDB >= 5.4.0::

    SET optimizer_reorder_hash_join = false
    SET optimizer_reorder_nested_loop_join = false

  On CrateDB < 5.4.0 (this will disable the hash-join algorithm which may lead
  to poor performance)::

    SET enable_hashjoin = false

Fixes
=====

- Updated the bundled OpenJDK to 20.0.2+9

- Allowed user to :ref:`RESET<ref-set>` cluster settings with ``archived.``
  prefix.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to a ``class_cast_exception`` when using a
  subscript expression on an aliased expression that shadows another column. For
  example::

    SELECT a['b'] FROM (SELECT UNNEST(a) AS a FROM tbl) t;

- Fixed an issue that caused ``SET SESSION`` statements to fail for settings
  that are both session settings and global settings, like
  ``statement_timeout``.

- Fixed an issue that caused a ``object_column = {}`` query to not match if the
  object column doesn't have any child columns.

- Fixed an issue that caused queries against views to evaluate the view
  definition with the current search path. This could cause issues if the
  search path diverged. The fix only applies to newly created views.

- Fixed a ``Failed to validate IP`` error that occurred when using the
  ``any_value`` aggregation on a column of type ``IP``.

- Improved error message when passing settings with ``WITH`` clause on a
  :ref:`CREATE SUBSCRIPTION<sql-create-subscription>` statement, which is not
  currently supported.

- Fixed an issue that resulted in hiding errors with the connection URL of
  :ref:`CREATE SUBSCRIPTION<sql-create-subscription>`, when executed from a
  non-superuser but with `AL` privileges.

- Allowed trailing ``/`` without a database name for connection URL of
  :ref:`CREATE SUBSCRIPTION<sql-create-subscription>`.

- Fixed a ``NullPointerException`` which could happen if using a cross join on a
  sub-query, where the sub-query was executed using a ``Fetch`` operator. An
  example query::

    SELECT
      *
    FROM
      (SELECT a FROM tbl1 ORDER BY b DESC LIMIT 1) i,
      tbl2
    WHERE
      c >= 50;

- Fixed a ``NullPointerException`` which was thrown, instead of using default
  ``no compression`` behavior, when
  :ref:`compression parameter<sql-copy-to-compression>` of
  :ref:`COPY TO<sql-copy-to>` statement is set to ``null``.

- Fixed ``IndexOutOfBoundsException`` caused by an ``IS [NOT] NULL`` filter on
  a sub-column of an object or object array in a ``WHERE`` clause, e.g. ::

    CREATE TABLE test (o1 ARRAY(OBJECT AS (col INT)), o2 OBJECT);
    SELECT * FROM test WHERE o1[1]['col'] IS NULL;
    => IndexOutOfBoundsException[Index: 1 Size: 1]
    SELECT * FROM test AS T WHERE T.o2['unknown_col'] IS NOT NULL;
    => IndexOutOfBoundsException[Index: 1 Size: 1]

- Fixed an issue which caused ``INSERT INTO`` statements to skip generated
  expression validation for partitioned columns.

- Fixed an issue which caused arrays in ``IGNORED`` objects to be converted to
  nulls.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``LIKE``/``ILIKE`` operators on ``INDEX OFF``
  columns to return empty results.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``LIKE ANY``/``ILIKE ANY`` operators to accept
  only left arguments as patterns. Both arguments can now be patterns, e.g. ::

    SELECT 'a' LIKE ANY(['a%']);
    +-------+
    | false |
    +-------+
    | FALSE | -- true will be returned after the fix
    +-------+

- Fixed an issue which caused ``INSERT INTO ... SELECT ...`` statements to
  leave behind empty partitions if ``NULL`` or ``CHECK`` constraint on
  partitioned by column failed.

- Fixed an issue which caused errors on querying ``information_schema`` tables
  when the query of a ``VIEW`` is erroneous due to changes made to the
  underlying tables/views. Also, added a comment to view definition in
  ``pg_catalog.pg_views`` and ``information_schema.views`` tables to denote
  that a ``VIEW``'s query is erroneous.

- Fixed ``SQLParseException`` caused by querying an unknown key from an object
  column of a table that is aliased and with the session setting
  :ref:`error_on_unknown_object_key <conf-session-error_on_unknown_object_key>`,
  set to ``false``, e.g. ::

    CREATE TABLE test (o OBJECT);
    SELECT T.o['unknown'] from (SELECT * FROM test) AS T;
    => SQLParseException[Couldn't create execution plan from logical plan because of: Couldn't find o['unknown'] in SourceSymbols{inputs={}, nonDeterministicFunctions={}}

