.. _version_5.5.0:

==========================
Version 5.5.0 - Unreleased
==========================

.. comment 1. Remove the " - Unreleased" from the header above and adjust the ==
.. comment 2. Remove the NOTE below and replace with: "Released on 20XX-XX-XX."
.. comment    (without a NOTE entry, simply starting from col 1 of the line)

.. NOTE::

    In development. 5.5.0 isn't released yet. These are the release notes for
    the upcoming release.


.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.5.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.4 release before moving to
    5.5.0.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.4.x to 5.5.0 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Breaking Changes
================

- Added ``CURRENT_DATE``, ``CURRENT_TIME`` and ``CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`` to
  non-reserved keywords.

- Validation for ``COPY FROM`` is now enforced. The ``validation`` parameter is
  deprecated and using it results in a deprecation message in the logs.

- `UPDATE`` statements will continue on row failures instead of always showing 
  an error. The affected rows are displayed by the resulting row count.

Deprecations
============

None


Changes
=======

SQL Statements
--------------

- Changed the ``CREATE TABLE`` analysis to be more strict. Before it was
  possible to use unqualified names in place of string literals to define values
  within ``WITH`` clauses. Now string literals are required.

  For example, instead of::

    my_column text index using fulltext with (analyzer = myanalyzer)

  It is necessary to use::

    my_column text index using fulltext with (analyzer = 'myanalyzer')


- Changed ``CREATE TABLE`` to allow defining ``CHECK`` constraints inline on
  sub-columns of object columns. Before it was necessary to use table check
  constraints.

- Added support for
  :ref:`ALTER TABLE DROP COLUMN <sql-alter-table-drop-column>` statement.

- Added support for
  :ref:`CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS AS <ref-create-table-as>` statement.

SQL Standard and PostgreSQL Compatibility
-----------------------------------------

- Allowed statements that set
  :ref:`standard_conforming_strings session setting<conf-session-standard_conforming_strings>`
  to the default value (``on``).
 
- Added a new read-only session setting ``max_identifier_length``.

- Added support for :ref:`INTERVAL <type-interval>` multiplication by integers.

Data Types
----------

- Added support for explicit casts from strings in JSON list format to
  ``object[]``.

- Added a :ref:`FLOAT_VECTOR <type-float_vector>` type to store dense vectors of
  float values which can be searched using a k-nearest neighbour algorithm via a
  new :ref:`KNN_MATCH <scalar_knn_match>` scalar.


Scalar and Aggregation Functions
--------------------------------

- Added a :ref:`KNN_MATCH <scalar_knn_match>` scalar.

- Added a ``(string FROM string)`` overload to :ref:`scalar-substr` to extract a
  substring from a string that matches a POSIX regular expression pattern.


Performance and Resilience Improvements
---------------------------------------

- Limited the amount of errors returned by ``RETURN SUMMARY`` of ``COPY FROM``
  to prevent running into circuit breaker errors due to memory constraints.


Administration and Operations
-----------------------------

- Added an optimizer rule for cross-join elimination which will reorder
  the joined relations of a query to eliminate cross-joins e.g.::

    SELECT * FROM t1 CROSS JOIN t2 INNER JOIN t3 ON t3.z = t1.x AND t3.z = t2.y

  This query can be reordered to t1, t3, t2 to eliminate the cross-join between
  t1 and t2. This will result in the following logical plan::

    Eval[x, y, z]
      └ Join[INNER | (z = y)]
        ├ Join[INNER | (x = z)]
        │  ├ Collect[doc.t1 | [x] | true]
        │  └ Collect[doc.t3 | [z] | true]
        └ Collect[doc.t2 | [y] | true]

   This optimizer rule can be disabled with the session settings::

    SET optimizer_eliminate_cross_join = false

  Note that this setting is experimental, and may change in the future.

- Added support for renaming views via ``ALTER TABLE <view> RENAME TO <newName>``.

- Changed permissions on ``sys.jobs`` and ``sys.jobs_log`` to allow users with
  the ``AL`` privileges to see entries from other users.

- Added a new :ref:`memory.operation_limit` cluster and session setting.

- Added support for endpoint and secondary endpoint to
  :ref:`CREATE REPOSITORY for Azure storage <sql-create-repo-azure>`.
