.. _version_5.6.0:

=============
Version 5.6.0
=============

Released on 2024-01-22.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.6.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.5 release before moving to
    5.6.0.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.5.x to 5.6.0 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _5.6.0_breaking_changes:

Breaking Changes
================

- When :ref:`restoring a snapshot <sql-restore-snapshot>`, ``USERS`` and
  ``PRIVILEGES`` keywords, used to restore user management metadata has been
  replaced by ``USERMANAGEMENT``, which dictates that all users and roles of the
  database together with their privileges are restored. Restoring ``USERS`` or
  ``PRIVILEGES`` separately is not possible anymore.

Deprecations
============

- ``USERS`` and ``PRIVILEGES`` keywords, used when
  :ref:`restoring a snapshot <sql-restore-snapshot>`, in order to restore users
  and privileges metadata respectively, have been deprecated. They have been
  replaced by ``USERMANAGEMENT`` and their behavior has been modified, please
  see :ref:`Breaking Changes <5.6.0_breaking_changes>` for details.

Changes
=======

SQL Statements
--------------

- Added support for explicit :ref:`NULL <null_constraint>` column constraint
  definitions in ``CREATE TABLE`` statements.

- Added support for named :ref:`PRIMARY KEY constraint declaration
  <primary_key_constraint>`.

- Extended the :ref:`EXPLAIN <ref-explain>` statement to support the ``VERBOSE``
  option.

- Added support for
  :ref:`ALTER TABLE RENAME COLUMN <sql-alter-table-rename-column>` statement.

- Added support for :ref:`CREATE ROLE <ref-create-role>` statement. For details
  see `Administration and Operations`_.

- Added support for :ref:`ALTER ROLE <ref-alter-role>` statement, which is
  identical to :ref:`ALTER USER <ref-alter-user>` statement.

- Added support for :ref:`DROP ROLE <ref-drop-role>` statement, which is
  identical to :ref:`DROP USER <ref-drop-user>` statement.

SQL Standard and PostgreSQL Compatibility
-----------------------------------------

- Added a ``unknown`` type for serialization via the PostgreSQL wire protocol
  and to the ``pg_catalog.pg_type`` table. This should resolve compatibility
  issues with ``npgsql`` >= 8.0.

- Added an empty ``pg_catalog.pg_depend`` table.

- Changed ``pg_catalog.pg_roles`` table to be properly populated, as previously
  it was always returning ``0`` rows.

- Added support of optional ``ESCAPE`` parameter to
  :ref:`LIKE and ILIKE <sql_dql_like>` operators.

Data Types
----------

- Introduced the BKD-tree-based indexing strategy for :ref:`geo_shape <data-types-geo-shape>`.

Scalar and Aggregation Functions
--------------------------------

- Updated the ``tdigest`` library which results in the ``percentile``
  aggregation function to behave differently in some cases. For example, the
  following query used to return ``4.5`` but will now return ``5.0``::

    SELECT percentile(x, 0.5) FROM generate_series(0, 9, 1) AS t (x) ;


Performance and Resilience Improvements
---------------------------------------

- Reduced the amount of disk reads necessary for ``ANALYZE`` operations.

- Improved filter push-down for left/right outer joins when the joins are
  nested e.g.::

    SELECT * FROM (SELECT * FROM a LEFT JOIN b ON a.a = b.b LEFT JOIN c ON b.b = c.c) t WHERE b > 1;
  
  Now, the above query will result in the following logical plan ::

    NestedLoopJoin[LEFT | (b = c)] (rows=unknown)
      ├ HashJoin[(a = b)] (rows=unknown)
      │  ├ Collect[doc.a | [a] | true] (rows=unknown)
      │  └ Collect[doc.b | [b] | (b > 1)] (rows=unknown)
      └ Collect[doc.c | [c] | true] (rows=unknown)


Administration and Operations
-----------------------------

- Added database roles, which can be used to group privileges, and can be
  granted to users or other roles, thus enabling
  :ref:`privileges inheritance <roles_inheritance>`.

- Allowed un-indexed columns or columns without doc-values to be queryable.

- Added the new options ``schema_rename_pattern``,
  ``schema_rename_replacement``, ``table_rename_pattern`` and
  ``table_rename_replacement`` to :ref:`RESTORE SNAPSHOT<sql-restore-snapshot>`
  to allow renaming tables during restore.

- Added :ref:`sys.roles<sys-roles>` table which contains all database roles
  defined in the cluster.

- Added ``granted_roles`` column to :ref:`sys.users<sys-users>` table which
  lists the roles granted to a user, together with the user that granted each
  role.

User Interface
--------------

- Updated to Admin UI 1.24.7, which fixed a minor grammar issue on the Spanish
  version of the Help page, and optimized images with ``oxipng``.
