.. _version_5.7.0:

==========================
Version 5.7.0 - Unreleased
==========================

.. comment 1. Remove the " - Unreleased" from the header above and adjust the ==
.. comment 2. Remove the NOTE below and replace with: "Released on 20XX-XX-XX."
.. comment    (without a NOTE entry, simply starting from col 1 of the line)

.. NOTE::

    In development. 5.7.0 isn't released yet. These are the release notes for
    the upcoming release.


.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 4.0.2 or higher
    before you upgrade to 5.7.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.6 release before moving to
    5.7.0.

    A rolling upgrade from 5.6.x to 5.7.0 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 4.x will not function with 5.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 5.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


Breaking Changes
================

- Added ``CURRENT_ROLE`` as a reserved keyword. If you have a column or table
  named ``CURRENT_ROLE``, you must escape it using double quotes.

- Changed :ref:`scalar-exp` to always return ``double`` type for its result,
  independently of the input type.

Deprecations
============

None

Changes
=======

SQL Statements
--------------

None

SQL Standard and PostgreSQL Compatibility
-----------------------------------------

- Allow shortcut one-char names for PostgreSQL style
  :ref:`INTERVALs <type-interval>`, e.g.::

    SELECT '1y 2w 3d 4h 5m 6s'::INTERVAL

- Added initial support for foreign data wrappers, including a ``jdbc``
  :ref:`foreign data wrapper <administration-fdw>`.

- Added the :ref:`scalar-current_role` scalar function as an alias for
  :ref:`scalar-current_user`.

- `Dhruv Patel <https://github.com/DHRUV6029>`_ added support for the ``^``
  operator as syntax sugar for the :ref:`scalar-power` scalar function. E.g.::

    SELECT 5 ^ 2;

Data Types
----------

- Added support for nested arrays in ``CREATE TABLE`` statements

Scalar and Aggregation Functions
--------------------------------

- Removed the -1 to 1 value constraint from :ref:`scalar-atan`.

- Added the :ref:`scalar-reverse` scalar function.

- `rebdiaz <https://github.com/rebdiaz>`_ added support for lower case ``yyyy``
  format string to :ref:`to_char <scalar-to_char>` scalar function, which
  behaves exactly the same as uppercase ``YYYY`` to match PostgreSQL behaviour.

Performance and Resilience Improvements
---------------------------------------

- Improved the performance for hash-joins when there is a large
  imbalance between the size of the tables with a lookup-join optimization.
  This optimization can be disabled if desired, with the session setting::

      SET optimizer_equi_join_to_lookup_join = false

    Note that this setting is experimental, and may change in the future.

- Improved the performance of the :ref:`analyze` statement. CrateDB now uses much
  less memory when collecting column statistics.

- The join optimizer rule that pushes down filters in join conditions for
  nested loop joins, is expanded to also handle hash joins.

Administration and Operations
-----------------------------

- `meteoiker <https://github.com/meteoiker>`_ added the ability to set a
  :ref:`use_path_style_access <sql-create-repo-s3-use_path_style_access>` for
  S3 repositories.

- `Herman Bergwerf <https://github.com/bergwerf>`_ added support for
  :ref:`Google Cloud Storage repositories <sql-create-repo-gcs>` to write and
  restore snapshots on Google Cloud Storage.

- Added ``jwt`` column to :ref:`sys.users<sys-users>` table which lists JWT
  authentication specific properties of the user.

- Added support for :ref:`JWT token authentication <auth_jwt>`.

User Interface
--------------

None




