.. _version_6.0.0:

==========================
Version 6.0.0 - Unreleased
==========================

.. comment 1. Remove the " - Unreleased" from the header above and adjust the ==
.. comment 2. Remove the NOTE below and replace with: "Released on 20XX-XX-XX."
.. comment    (without a NOTE entry, simply starting from col 1 of the line)
.. NOTE::
    In development. 6.0.0 isn't released yet. These are the release notes for
    the upcoming release.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 5.0.0 or higher
    before you upgrade to 6.0.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 5.10 release before moving to
    6.0.0.

    A rolling upgrade from >= 5.10.1 to 6.0.0 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 5.x will not function with 6.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 6.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _version_6.0.0_breaking_changes:

Breaking Changes
================

- Updated Lucene from 9.12 to 10.2 which brings the following user facing changes:

  - Tables created in 4.x can't be read anymore. If you're running CrateDB 5.x
    and have any tables created in 4.x they need to be reindexed before moving
    to CrateDB 6.0. Make sure there are no warnings in the admin console and see
    :ref:`table_version_compatibility` for more information.

  - The ``dutch_kp`` and ``lovins`` token filters are no longer available. If
    users have tables which use these token filters for analysis, they will need
    to re-index with either plain ``dutch`` or ``english`` stemmers before
    upgrading.

  - The ``german2`` and ``german`` token filters now use the same underlying stemmer,
    which always expands ``ä``, ``ö`` and ``ü`` to ``ae``, ``oe`` and ``ue`` respectively.
    If users have tables which were using the ``german`` stemmer without a character
    filter that already did this, they will need to re-index after upgrading.

- Removed the deprecated ``soft_deletes.enabled`` setting for ``CREATE TABLE``.
  The setting defaulted to ``true`` since 4.3.0, was deprecated in 4.5.0 and
  soft deletes became mandatory in 5.0.0.

- When casting an expression of type :ref:`OBJECT <type-object>` to an
  :ref:`OBJECT <type-object>`, the inner types are merged instead of being
  replaced by the target type and the target
  :ref:`column policy <type-object-column-policy>` is used. The only exception
  is when the target column policy is set to
  :ref:`STRICT <type-object-columns-strict>`. In this case, only the target
  inner type definition is used. See also the related
  :ref:`documentation <cast_to_object>`

- Removed support for patterns on the left side argument of
  :ref:`LIKE/ILIKE <sql_dql_like>` operators because it led to ambiguities when
  both sides contained possible pattern like strings e.g.::

    SELECT 'a%' LIKE ANY(['a__']);

- Updated the default ``compression`` of
  :ref:`percentile aggregation <aggregation-percentile>` from ``100.0`` to
  ``200.0`` which increases the accuracy of the approximations but with the
  cost of slightly more memory consumption and increased execution time,
  depending on the used data set.
  To regain existing behaviour, adjust the ``compression`` argument of the
  :ref:`percentile aggregation <aggregation-percentile>` accordingly.

- Made the behavior of the ``DENY`` and ``GRANT`` statements stricter. They now
  fail if there is a mismatch between the ``securable`` (``VIEW`` or ``TABLE``)
  and the actual relation type of the relation addressed by ``<ident>``. Before
  a statement like ``GRANT DQL ON TABLE actually_a_view`` would succeed but not
  do anything.

- Applied normalization for :ref:`IP <data-types-ip-addresses>` values so that
  for example ``'::ffff:192.168.0.1'::IP``, becomes ``'192.168.0.1'``.
  Previously, this normalization was already applied for all the values inserted
  into a column of :ref:`IP <data-types-ip-addresses>`, but was not applied for
  literal values in an SQL query, and was also **not** applied to the values
  inserted into a column of ``IP`` data type, when this column was part of the
  ``PRIMARY KEY`` of the table. This resulted in wrong behavior when trying to
  filter on the table by it's ``IP`` (``PRIMARY KEY``), as the value stored
  for the ``_id`` would have been the un-normalized one, whereas the value
  for the table column would have been the normalized one. e.g.::

    CREATE  TABLE  tbl(a IP , PRIMARY KEY(a));
    INSERT INTO tbl(a) VALUES ('::ffff:192.168.0.1');
    REFRESH TABLE tbl;
    SELECT _id, a FROM tbl;

  Would yield::

    +--------------------+-------------+
    | _id                | a           |
    +--------------------+-------------+
    | ::ffff:192.168.0.1 | 192.168.0.1 |
    +--------------------+-------------+

  So the query::

    SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE a = '192.168.0.1'

  would not return any results, as it will use the ``_id`` to try and match the
  ``IP`` value in the ``WHERE`` clause. You can find more details about this
  mechanism :ref:`here <concept-addressing-documents>`.

  .. WARNING::

      Because of this change, users are advised to re-create tables which have
      an ``IP`` column as ``PRIMARY KEY`` or as part of the ``PRIMARY KEY``.
      Since the string ``IP`` values will be automatically normalized before
      stored as ``_id``, if for example a value: ``::ffff:192.168.0.1``
      is already stored on the table, after upgrading to :ref:`version_6.0.0`,
      it will be possible to re-insert the value on the table, without any
      complaint from the ``PRIMARY KEY`` constraint check, as the value will be
      stored, normalized, as ``192.168.0.1``.

 - Fixed an issue that caused queries filtering on partition(s) of a table for
   which the ``PARTITION BY`` clause, contains a column of ``BOOLEAN`` type to
   return no results, e.g. for a table::

     CREATE TABLE tbl(id BOOLEAN, PRIMARY KEY(id)) PARTITIONED BY (id);
     INSERT INTO tbl(id) VALUES (FALSE);
     REFRESH TABLE tbl;

   The query::

     SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE id = FALSE;

   would return ``0`` rows;

   .. WARNING::

       Because of this fix, users should re-create tables which have a
       ``BOOLEAN`` column in their ``PARTITIONED BY`` clause.

- Added a :ref:`statement_max_length` setting to limit the length of allowed SQL
  statements. It defaults to 262144. Statements exceeding this limit are rejected
  because large statements consume a high amount of memory. Large statements are
  typically caused by inline values or using a large number of ``VALUES``
  clauses.
  Instead, statements should be written using parameter symbols (``?``) and
  inserting lots of values should be done using either bulk operations or a
  ``INSERT INTO`` in combination with a ``SELECT FROM`` and ``UNNEST``.

- Changed the output column names of a query result, which correspond to
  function calls to return the function name. Previously, for a function call
  that can be pre-evaluated, without using any data from the underlying tables,
  the column name would be the evaluated value, e.g.::

    cr> SELECT ((1+2)*3);
    +---+
    | 9 |
    +---+
    | 9 |
    +---+

  With this change::

    cr> SELECT ((1+2)*3);
    +---------------+
    | ((1 + 2) * 3) |
    +---------------+
    |             9 |
    +---------------+

  Additionally, previously, function calls which are using table columns as
  arguments, would be returned as column names, using the complete function
  call, but with this change only the function name is used, so that it matches
  the behavior of PostgreSQL. e.g. Previously::

    cr> SELECT avg(a) FROM tbl;
    +--------+
    | avg(a) |
    +--------+
    |    3.0 |
    +--------+

  With this change::

    cr> SELECT avg(a) FROM tbl;
    +-----+
    | avg |
    +-----+
    | 3.0 |
    +-----+

  .. NOTE::

      When a function call which uses table columns as arguments is nested
      in an comparison or arithmetic expression, the output name of the column
      continues to expose the complete function call. e.g.::

        cr> SELECT sqrt(a) > 1 FROM tbl;
        +---------------+
        | (sqrt(a) > 1) |
        +---------------+
        | TRUE          |
        +---------------+

 - :ref:`aggregation-stddev` changed and is now an alias for
   :ref:`aggregation-stddev-samp`, to match PostgreSQL behavior. In order to
   calculate the population standard deviation, :ref:`aggregation-stddev-pop`
   must be used.

- ``current_catalog`` has been added to the list of reserved keywords, because
  of the addition of :ref:`scalar-current_catalog` function which is called as a
  keyword without the ``()``. The whole list of keywords can be found
  :ref:`here <sql_lexical_keywords_identifiers>`.

Deprecations
============

 - Usage of :ref:`_version<sql_administration_system_column_version>` has been
   deprecated completely. Please note that its usage for :ref:`sql_occ` has
   already been deprecated since :ref:`version_4.0.0`.


Changes
=======

SQL Statements
--------------

- ``COPY FROM`` now assumes that the input files are ``gzip`` compressed if all
  of the specified files end in ``.gz``.

SQL Standard and PostgreSQL Compatibility
-----------------------------------------

- Added the :ref:`starts_with <scalar-starts_with>` scalar function, which
  returns true if a string starts with a given prefix.

- Added support for lower case format patterns to the
  :ref:`to_char <scalar-to_char>` scalar function.

- Added the :ref:`information_schema.applicable_roles <applicable_roles>`,
  :ref:`information_schema.enabled_roles <enabled_roles>`,
  :ref:`information_schema.administrable_role_authorizations <administrable_role_authorizations>`
  and :ref:`information_schema.role_table_grants <role_table_grants>` tables.

- Populated the ``pg_index.indnkeyatts`` column with the number of key
  attributes in the primary key.

Data Types
----------

- Added support for dynamic mapping of nested arrays.

- Improved error handling of missing keys when accessing elements of (nested)
  :ref:`object type<type-object>` expressions to be consistent according to the
  defined :ref:`type-object-column-policy` and the related
  :ref:`conf-session-error_on_unknown_object_key` session setting.

Scalar and Aggregation Functions
--------------------------------

- Added :ref:`scalar-current_catalog` function which for CrateDB always returns
  ``crate``, to enhance compatibility with PostgreSQL JDBC driver.

- Improved performance of :ref:`aggregation-avg` function when operating on
  columns of :ref:`NUMERIC type<type-numeric>` with enabled
  :ref:`ddl-storage-columnstore`.

- Added support for :ref:`NUMERIC type<type-numeric>` to the
  :ref:`aggregation-avg-distinct` function.

- Added support for :ref:`NUMERIC type<type-numeric>` to the following
  arithmetic scalar functions: :ref:`POWER<scalar-power>`,
  :ref:`DEGREES<scalar-degrees>` and :ref:`RADIANS<scalar-radians>`.

- Added support for the :ref:`array_overlap<scalar-array_overlap>` scalar
  function and the associated :ref:`&&<array_overlap_operator>` operator.

- Added support for the :ref:`aggregation-stddev-pop` function to compute
  the population standard deviation.

- Added support for :ref:`NUMERIC type<type-numeric>` to the
  :ref:`aggregation-stddev-pop` function.

- Added support for the :ref:`aggregation-stddev-samp` function to compute
  the sample standard deviation.

- Replaced `t-digest <https://github.com/tdunning/t-digest>`_ algorithm used by
  :ref:`percentile aggregation <aggregation-percentile>` from ``AVLTreeDigest``
  to ``MergingDigest`` to improve the consistency and accuracy of the result.

Performance and Resilience Improvements
---------------------------------------

- Changed how scheduling and prioritization for read queries, in particular
  queries against ``sys.shards`` and ``sys.nodes`` work. This should help
  continue monitoring a cluster that is overloaded with too many concurrent
  queries.

- Improved the logic to push down expressions within the ``WHERE`` clause to the
  table to use index lookups instead of resulting in post-filtering when using
  virtual tables involving table functions and object columns. For example, the
  following case now gets optimized::

    SELECT *
    FROM (
      SELECT *, unnest(document['arr'])
      FROM tbl
    ) t
    WHERE document['field1'] >=1;

- Improved the performance for ``SELECT COUNT(not_null_column) FROM tbl``. It is
  now executed the same way as ``SELECT COUNT(*) FROM tbl``.

- Improved the handling of temporary unavailable shards during read-only
  queries. There's now a higher chance that the system can deal with the
  temporary failure without surfacing the error to the client.

- Improved execution for queries with mixed implicit and explicit joins.
  Joins are now always executed in the original order of the query.

- Improved the performance of the queries involving ``= ALL`` array operator.

- Improved the performance of :ref:`shard recovery<gloss-shard-recovery>` in
  certain cases, where a shard has become idle after 5 minutes of no write
  activity.

- Increased the frequency of retention lease synchronization, which will make
  merges more likely to be able to remove recovery source.

Administration and Operations
-----------------------------

- Added ``merge_id`` and ``fully_merged_docs`` columns to the sys.segments table
  to give more information on ongoing merges and whether the recovery source is
  still present in merged segments.

- Added the :ref:`sys.cluster_health <sys-cluster_health>` table to provide
  information about the health of the whole cluster in comparison to
  the :ref:`sys.health <sys-health>` table which exposes health about each
  table only.

- Added a :ref:`insert_select_fail_fast <conf-session-insert-select-fail-fast>`
  session setting that allows partial failures of ``INSERT FROM SELECT``
  statements.

- Added ``last_write_before`` column to the sys.shards table, reporting a
  timestamp before which the last write operation to the shard has taken place.

- Re-enabled :ref:`mapping.depth.limit <sql-create-table-mapping-depth-limit>`
  setting to enforce a maximum nesting depth for object columns when adding new
  columns to a table. The default value is ``100``. The limit can be increased
  if necessary, but use caution;deeply nested structures may lead to long
  execution times or stack overflow errors.

Client interfaces
-----------------
