.. _version_6.1.3:

==========================
Version 6.1.3 - Unreleased
==========================

.. comment 1. Remove the " - Unreleased" from the header above and adjust the ==
.. comment 2. Remove the NOTE below and replace with: "Released on 20XX-XX-XX."
.. comment    (without a NOTE entry, simply starting from col 1 of the line)
.. NOTE::

    In development. 6.1.3 isn't released yet. These are the release notes for
    the upcoming release.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 5.0.0 or higher
    before you upgrade to 6.1.3.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 6.0 release before moving to
    6.1.3.

    A rolling upgrade from >= 6.0.2 to 6.1.3 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 5.x will not function with 6.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 6.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_6.1.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the 6.1
series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that prevented ``ILIKE`` from matching records with text
  containing newline characters.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to a ``Couldn't create executionContexts from
  [...] Can't handle Symbol`` error when running ``SELECT`` queries involving
  expressions using multiple columns like ``CASE`` and a ``LIMIT`` clause.

- Changed :ref:`hyperloglog_distinct <aggregation-hyperloglog-distinct>` to return
  ``0`` instead of ``NULL`` if using a ``FILTER`` clause that doesn't match any
  records - to be consistent with a global ``WHERE`` and ``COUNT``.

- Fixed a regression introduced in :ref:`version_6.1.0` that could lead to
  mixing partial success results with error message in the response from the
  ``HTTP`` endpoint.

- Fixed an issue causing memory leaks if requests to the ``HTTP`` endpoint
  failed due to a missing :ref:`HBA <admin_hba>` entry or wrong credentials.

- Fixed an issue that caused direct memory under-accounting, potentially leading
  to an ``OutOfMemoryError`` when a large result set was returned by the
  ``HTTP`` endpoint.

- Fixed a regression introduced with :ref:`version_6.0.0` that led to wrong
  results when mixing ``CROSS JOIN`` and ``INNER JOIN`` on a condition with a
  :ref:`CASE<scalar-case-when-then-end>` referring to one of the cross joined
  tables. e.g.::

    SELECT * FROM t1, t0
    INNER JOIN (SELECT 1 AS col0) AS sub0
    ON (CASE sub0.col0 WHEN sub0.col0 THEN t0.c0 ELSE false END)

- Fixed an issue resulting in a non matching :ref:`sql_dql_is_null` predicate
  when NULL values are inserted into a new sub-column of a
  :ref:`type-object` column with dynamic mapping enabled. E.g.::

    CREATE TABLE t (o OBJECT(DYNAMIC));
    INSERT INTO t (o) VALUES ({"a": NULL});
    SELECT * FROM t WHERE o['a'] IS NULL;  -- now returns the row

- Fixed a regression introduced in :ref:`version_6.0.0` that caused
  :ref:`sql-insert` statements with writes into columns of type
  :ref:`OBJECT(DYNAMIC) <type-object-columns-dynamic>` to fail with an NPE if
  a nested object value containing elements with ``NULL`` values was inserted
  before. Example::

    CREATE TABLE t1 (obj OBJECT(DYNAMIC));
    INSERT INTO t1 (obj) VALUES ({a = {b = NULL}});
    INSERT INTO t1 (obj) VALUES ({a = {c = 1}});

- Fixed an issue that caused under-accounting of memory usage of some queries
  stored in cache. It affected cache eviction that is depending on query memory
  usage, potentially leading to an ``OutOfMemoryError``.

- Fixed an issue with users being able to execute
  :ref:`user defined functions <user-defined-functions>`, even if they lacked
  privileges on the schema under which a ``UDF`` is defined. Now ``DQL``
  :ref:`privilege <administration-privileges>` on the schema is required.
