.. _version_6.2.2:

==========================
Version 6.2.2 - Unreleased
==========================

.. comment 1. Remove the " - Unreleased" from the header above and adjust the ==
.. comment 2. Remove the NOTE below and replace with: "Released on 20XX-XX-XX."
.. comment    (without a NOTE entry, simply starting from col 1 of the line)
.. NOTE::

    In development. 6.2.2 isn't released yet. These are the release notes for
    the upcoming release.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 5.0.0 or higher
    before you upgrade to 6.2.2.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 6.1 release before moving to
    6.2.2.

    A rolling upgrade from >= 6.1.2 to 6.2.2 is supported. Doing a rolling
    upgrade from an earlier version than 6.1.2 can cause runtime errors when
    executing statements relying on implicit casts.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 5.x will not function with 6.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 6.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:


See the :ref:`version_6.2.0` release notes for a full list of changes in the 6.2
series.

Fixes
=====

- Fixed an issue that caused ``ALTER TABLE`` statements to fail if the table
  contains columns of type ``UNDEFINED`` due to dynamic column creation with
  ``null`` values.

- Fixed an issue that could cause a ``NullPointerException`` when using the
  :ref:`topk <aggregation-topk>` aggregation on a column containing ``null``
  values.

- Fixed an issue that caused a :ref:`SUM <aggregation-sum>` aggregation to cause
  a ``NullPointerException`` if used on a column containing null values and used
  as part of a window function with a window definition where the null values
  appeared first or intermediate instead of last.

  An Example::

    select sum(x) over (order by x nulls first rows between 1 preceding and 1 following)
    from (
      select null
      union all
      select 1
      union all
      select 2
    ) tbl (x);

- Fixed an issue that caused :ref:`swap table <alter_cluster_swap_table>` or
  :ref:`drop table <drop-table>` to cause temporary metadata corruption if
  run during a rolling upgrade from 5.10.x. The corruption can be recovered by
  restarting the upgraded nodes. Rolling upgrades from 6.0+ to 6.2.2 weren't
  affected.

- Fixed an issue that caused :ref:`swap table <alter_cluster_swap_table>` on
  partitioned tables to be rejected with ``IllegalStateException`` due to wrong
  version upgrade migration logic. Only tables created on or before 5.10.x are
  affected.

- Fixed an issue that could lead to queries being stuck when a distributed
  query was interrupted by a ``CircuitBreakingException`` on a cluster under
  high memory pressure.

- Fixed an issue where a ``KILL ALL`` statement is not succeeding due to
  existing high memory pressure on the cluster.

- Fixed a regression introduced in :ref:`version_6.0.0` that caused a
  ``ColumnUnknownException``, even when disabling errors via the
  :ref:`error_on_unknown_object_key <conf-session-error_on_unknown_object_key>`
  session setting, when selecting a sub-column or array-index on a
  ``DYNAMIC`` or ``IGNORED`` object/array value returned by a table function
  like :ref:`UNNEST <unnest>`. Example::

    SET SESSION error_on_unknown_object_key = FALSE;
    SELECT obj_arr['child_obj']['unknown_array'][1]
    FROM (
      SELECT unnest([ {child_obj = { known_col = 'foo'}} ]) AS obj_arr
    ) AS sub1;

- Fixed a regression introduced in :ref:`version_6.0.0` that caused an error
  when trying to insert a nested array, or JSON string containing a nested
  array, with incompatible inner value types into a column of type
  ``OBJECT(ARRAY(OBJECT(IGNORED)))``. Example::

    CREATE TABLE t1 (obj OBJECT(DYNAMIC) AS (arr ARRAY(OBJECT(IGNORED))));
    INSERT INTO t1 (obj) VALUES (
    $$
       {"arr":[{"b": "str_val"}, {"b": ["array_val"]}]}
    $$);

- Fixed an issue causing cache to retain some heavy structures, potentially
  leading to an ``OutOfMemoryError``.

