.. _version_6.3.0:

==========================
Version 6.3.0 - Unreleased
==========================


.. comment 1. Remove the " - Unreleased" from the header above and adjust the ==
.. comment 2. Remove the NOTE below and replace with: "Released on 20XX-XX-XX."
.. comment    (without a NOTE entry, simply starting from col 1 of the line)
.. NOTE::

    In development. 6.3.0 isn't released yet. These are the release notes for
    the upcoming release.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 5.0.0 or higher
    before you upgrade to 6.3.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 6.2 release before moving to
    6.3.0.

    A rolling upgrade from >= 6.2.0 to 6.3.0 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 5.x will not function with 6.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 6.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _version_6.3.0_breaking_changes:

Breaking Changes
================

- Removed the ``canned_acl`` setting for repositories of type ``s3`` and also
  removed the undocumented proxy settings.

- Removed the ``token_uri`` setting for repositories of type ``gcs``.

- Removed the following settings for repositories of type ``azure``:

  - ``location_mode``
  - ``secondary_endpoint``
  - ``endpoint_suffix``
  - ``timeout``
  - ``proxy_type``
  - ``proxy_host``
  - ``proxy_port``

Deprecations
============

None


Changes
=======

SQL Statements
--------------

None

SQL Standard and PostgreSQL Compatibility
-----------------------------------------

- Added support for ``DEFAULT`` expressions in :ref:`INSERT INTO <sql-insert>`
  statements to explicitly declare that the default expression of a column
  should be used.

- Added the :ref:`information_schema.view_column_usage
  <information_schema_view_column_usage>` table.

- Added the :ref:`pg_sleep <scalar-pg_sleep>` function, which pauses a session.

- Added the :ref:`has_function_privileges <scalar-has-function-priv>` function,
  which checks whether a user has privileges to execute a function.

- Added support for ``SELECT`` statements without a column list (e.g.,
  ``SELECT FROM table``) to match PostgreSQL behavior. This enables
  compatibility with tools like TinyETL that use reflection queries such as
  ``SELECT EXISTS (SELECT FROM information_schema.tables WHERE table_name = $1)``.

Data Types
----------

None


Scalar and Aggregation Functions
--------------------------------

- `Dhruv Patel <https://github.com/DHRUV6029>`_ added support for ``interval``
  type to the :ref:`percentile <aggregation-percentile>` aggregation function.

- `Daniel Martínez Maqueda <https://github.com/belveryin>`_ added support for
  the :ref:`regexp_count <scalar-regexp_count>` scalar function to count
  regular expression matches, with optional ``start`` and ``flags`` arguments.

- `Marc Theisen <https://github.com/marctheisen>`_ added support for the
  :ref:`regexp_instr <scalar-regexp_instr>` scalar function to find the
  position of the ``N`` th regular expression match.

Performance and Resilience Improvements
---------------------------------------

- :ref:`analyze` now processes tables one after another to update the statistics
  instead of processing all tables concurrently. This reduces the impact it has
  on the cluster to avoid sudden spikes in disk IO or memory usage. The tradeoff
  is that the operation will now run longer.

- Added a :ref:`indices.breaker.policy` setting which can be set to either
  ``current`` (default - current behavior) or ``top_consumer`` (new experimental
  behavior). If set to ``top_consumer`` it changes the circuit breaking
  mechanism to abort the query consuming the most memory on the node where the
  circuit breaker was tripped instead of the query who tripped it.

- Changed the :ref:`swapping <alter_cluster_swap_table>` and
  :ref:`renaming <sql-alter-table-rename-to>` of tables to no longer re-allocate
  the shards of the swapped/renamed table, so that in-progress snapshots can
  finish successfully. Previously, the in-progress snapshots would fail and
  remain in ``PARTIAL`` state, with an ``ABORTED`` failure message showing in
  the :ref:`sys.snapshots <sys-snapshots>` system table.

- :ref:`INSERT INTO <sql-insert>` statements that create new partitions are no
  longer interrupted by :ref:`SWAP <alter_cluster_swap_table>` or
  :ref:`RENAME <sql-alter-table-rename-to>` table statements.

Administration and Operations
-----------------------------

- Added a ``region`` option to repositories of type ``s3`` for compatibility
  with alternative s3 implementations like `Garage
  <https://garagehq.deuxfleurs.fr/>`_.

- Repositories of type ``s3`` now use path style access by default instead of
  virtual host style when building the URI.

Client interfaces
-----------------

None
