.. _version_6.4.0:

==========================
Version 6.4.0 - Unreleased
==========================

.. comment 1. Remove the " - Unreleased" from the header above and adjust the ==
.. comment 2. Remove the NOTE below and replace with: "Released on 20XX-XX-XX."
.. comment    (without a NOTE entry, simply starting from col 1 of the line)
.. NOTE::

    In development. 6.4.0 isn't released yet. These are the release notes for
    the upcoming release.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 5.0.0 or higher
    before you upgrade to 6.4.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 6.3 release before moving to
    6.4.0.

    A rolling upgrade from >= 6.3.0 to 6.4.0 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 5.x will not function with 6.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 6.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _version_6.4.0_breaking_changes:

Breaking Changes
================

None

Deprecations
============

None


Changes
=======

SQL Statements
--------------

None

SQL Standard and PostgreSQL Compatibility
-----------------------------------------

- Added a :ref:`information_schema.collations <collations>` table.

- `Dhruv Patel <https://github.com/DHRUV6029>`_ added the ``pg_catalog.pg_user``
  table for PostgreSQL compatibility, resolving issues with tools like
  DbVisualizer that query this table during schema introspection.

Data Types
----------

- Added support for ``geo_point`` values in JSON array string format, for
  example ``"[14.988999953493476, 51.10299998894334]"``. This allows CSV files
  containing ``geo_point`` values in this format to be imported without
  transforming the source data first.


Scalar and Aggregation Functions
--------------------------------

- Added support for ``TH`` and ``th`` template patterns to the :ref:`to_char
  <scalar-to_char>` scalar function which can be used to add a ordinal suffix
  for numbers.

- `Robert Palmer <https://github.com/robd003>`_ added the
  :ref:`blake3 <scalar-blake3>` scalar function for computing BLAKE3 checksums of
  strings.

- `Bing O'Dowd <https://github.com/bodowd>`_ added the :ref:`largest triangle
  three buckets <aggregation-largest-triangle-three-buckets>` aggregation
  function for downsampling data using the Largest Triangle Three Buckets 
  algorithm

Performance and Resilience Improvements
---------------------------------------

- Improved the performance of bulk insert operations against tables that use
  user defined functions in a generated column which also has check constraints.

- Increased the default queue size of the ``write`` search pool but lowered the
  amount of internal retries for ``INSERT INTO <table> VALUES`` statements in
  exchange. This should lower the load for bulk inserts into tables with many
  shards at the expensive of potentially higher memory load before requests get
  rejected if clients make single inserts with high concurrency/many
  connections.

- Improved the performance of the :ref:`min() <aggregation-min>` and
  :ref:`max() <aggregation-max>` aggregations for columns of type :ref:`NUMERIC
  <data-types-numeric>`.

Administration and Operations
-----------------------------

- Added ``session_id`` column to the :ref:`sys.jobs <sys-jobs>` and
  :ref:`sys.jobs_log <sys-logs>` tables.

Client interfaces
-----------------

- Changed the HTTP interface to set parameter type hints which are guessed based
  on the ``args`` payload. This can help avoid having to add explicit casts
  within a SQL statement for parameter placeholders.

  For example, instead of ``SELECT percentile(height, ?::double precision) ...``
  it is possible to use ``SELECT percentile(height, ?)`` if ``args`` contains a
  numeric value.

  A side effect of this change is that cast semantics can become stricter. This
  could surface latent issues if the context where the parameter is used
  requires a cast to a different type. Consider for example an ``INSERT INTO tbl
  (xs) VALUES (?), (?)`` where ``xs`` is of type ``text[]`` but the payload for
  ``xs`` is an object array.

  Previously this used a cast from ``undefined`` to ``text[]`` and succeeded,
  now it can lead to errors like::

      The types of the columns within VALUES lists must match.
      Found `text_array` and `object_array` at position: 1
