.. _version_6.5.0:

==========================
Version 6.5.0 - Unreleased
==========================

.. comment 1. Remove the " - Unreleased" from the header above and adjust the ==
.. comment 2. Remove the NOTE below and replace with: "Released on 20XX-XX-XX."
.. comment    (without a NOTE entry, simply starting from col 1 of the line)
.. NOTE::

    In development. 6.5.0 isn't released yet. These are the release notes for
    the upcoming release.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 5.0.0 or higher
    before you upgrade to 6.5.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 6.4 release before moving to
    6.5.0.

    A rolling upgrade from >= 6.4.0 to 6.5.0 is supported.
    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created before CrateDB 5.x will not function with 6.x
    and must be recreated before moving to 6.x.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` or by
    `inserting the data into a new table`_.

.. _back up your data: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/snapshots.html
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://cratedb.com/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _version_6.5.0_breaking_changes:

Breaking Changes
================

- The PostgreSQL type mapping of CrateDB's ``byte`` type changed from ``"char"``
  (OID 18) to ``int2`` (OID 21). Clients now receive ``byte`` columns as
  ``int2`` in both text and binary formats.

  Most clients reading data determine the type of a column dynamically, and are
  largely unaffected. With ``pgjdbc``, ``ResultSet``'s ``getString()`` and
  ``getByte()`` return the same results as before. ``getObject()`` now returns a
  ``Short`` instead of a ``String``.

  The CrateDB JDBC driver is unaffected: ``getObject()`` returns an ``Integer``
  as it did before.

- Changed the type mapping of PostgreSQL's ``"char"`` type from ``byte``
  to :ref:`character(1) <data-type-character>`.

  Before:

    ``CREATE TABLE tbl (col "char");`` was equal to ``CREATE TABLE tbl (col byte);``

  After:

    ``CREATE TABLE tbl (col "char");`` is equal to ``CREATE TABLE tbl (col character(1));``

  Existing tables are not affected.
  For new tables the ``character(1)`` column will reject byte values, which are valid for a ``byte`` column:

      INSERT INTO tbl (col) VALUES (65);
      SQLParseException['65' is too long for the character type of length: 1]

  This improves compatibility with PostgreSQL: In cases where a PostgreSQL
  client sets the parameter type hint to OID 18 (``"char"``), and casts the
  value to ``character`` or ``varchar``, the byte encoded ``"char"`` value is
  now correctly interpreted as ASCII decimal 65, resulting in ``"A"``. Before
  it interpreted ``65`` as a character sequence, resulting in a ``"65"``
  string.

- The query plan that :ref:`EXPLAIN <ref-explain>` displays no longer shows
  operands in the order as written in the query. This is because operands are
  now normalized to be in lexicographic order. This enables deduplication of
  symmetrical join conditions (i.e. ``a = b`` is identical to ``b = a``).
  Query results are not affected.

Deprecations
============

None


Changes
=======

SQL Statements
--------------

None

SQL Standard and PostgreSQL Compatibility
-----------------------------------------

None

Data Types
----------

- `Dhruv Patel <https://github.com/DHRUV6029>`_ added support for using
  :ref:`date <type-date>` as a column type in ``CREATE TABLE`` statements,
  enabling migration of PostgreSQL schemas containing ``DATE`` columns
  without DDL modification.

Scalar and Aggregation Functions
--------------------------------

None

Performance and Resilience Improvements
---------------------------------------

- `Bing O'Dowd <https://github.com/bodowd>`_ improved query planning by
  deduplicating identical join conditions joined by the ``AND`` operator.

Administration and Operations
-----------------------------

None

Client interfaces
-----------------

None
