.. _version_1.0.1:

=============
Version 1.0.1
=============

Released on 2016/12/12.

.. NOTE::

   If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 0.57.0 or higher
   before you upgrade to 1.0.1.

   If you want to perform a `rolling upgrade`_, your current CrateDB version
   number must be :ref:`version_1.0.0`. If you want to upgrade from a version
   prior to this, the upgrade will introduce all of the breaking changes listed
   for :ref:`version_1.0.0`, and will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

.. WARNING::

   Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/rolling_upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/full_restart_upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/a/backing-up-and-restoring-crate/

Changelog
=========

Changes
-------

 - ``INSERT`` statements now support ``SELECT`` statements without parentheses.

 - Updated crate-admin to 1.0.2 which includes the following changes:

    - Removed pepper widget, support links are now in a Help section along with
      the Get Started tutorial.

    - Changed read notification behaviour so that all items are marked as read
      upon opening the settings.

    - Lowered opacity of placeholder query in the console.

    - Fix intercom support that disappeared during the implementation of the
      new admin-ui layout.

    - Fix Radio button position in load overview.

    - Made schema tabs more distinguishable from tables in the table list.

    - Updated link to support website in contact widget.

Fixes
-----

 - Fixed scalar signature registration, NULL literals are now supported.

 - Fixed usage of aggregations with NULL values, no exception will be thrown
   anymore but instead NULL values are properly processed.

 - The ``chunk_size`` and ``buffer_size`` settings for creating repositories
   of type ``S3`` are now parsed correctly.

 - CrateDB no longer throws an error when ``ANY`` or ``ALL`` array comparison
   expressions are used in ``SELECT`` list. e.g.::

       select 'foo' = any(some_array)

 - Fixed an issue that could lead to incorrect results if the ``WHERE`` clause
   contains primary key comparisons together with other functions like match.

 - Fixed an issue that caused select queries with bulk arguments to hang
   instead of throwing the proper error.

 - Fixed a rare race condition that could happen on select queries during a
   shard relocation leading to a ``ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException`` or a wrong
   result.

 - Creating new partitions could have failed if the partitioned table was
   created prior to CrateDB version 0.55.0 and the table contained a ``object``
   column. This issue has been fixed.
