.. _version_1.0.0:

=============
Version 1.0.0
=============

Released on 2016/12/05.

.. NOTE::

   If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 0.57.0 or higher
   before you upgrade to 1.0.0.

   You cannot perform a `rolling upgrade`_ to this version. Any upgrade to this
   version will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

.. WARNING::

   Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/rolling_upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/full_restart_upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/a/backing-up-and-restoring-crate/

Changelog
=========

Breaking Changes
----------------

 - Removed ``schema_name`` from ``information_schema.tables``,
   ``information_schema.columns``, and ``information_schema.table_constraints``
   in favour of ``table_schema``.

 - Possibly BREAKING blob storage changes:

   - Changed blob storage to utilize all paths listed under ``path.data``.

   - Changed the directory layout in case a custom ``blobs.path`` is
     configured. This allows running two nodes on the same machine pointing to
     the same ``blobs.path`` without conflicts.

   These changes require a manual migration for users who have blob tables and
   either had:

     - Multiple paths configured under ``path.data``

     - A custom ``blobs.path`` set either globally or per table.

   Please run the `migration script`_ provided **before** updating to examine
   whether you are affected by these changes. The migration script will tell
   you what has to be done.

Changes
-------

 - Removed the ``client`` package which contained the deprecated
   ``crate-client``. You should start using the PostgreSQL JDBC driver instead.

 - Removed Java 7 support

 - Optimize execution of joins by ordering the join relations based on
   join/where conditions.

 - Improved error message if function is unsupported with ``distinct``.

 - Nested numeric factors do not require brackets any more; e.g. ``SELECT + -
   10`` is now supported.

 - Added subscript support for ``cast`` and ``try_cast`` expressions. e.g.:
   ``select cast(coordinates as array(double))[1] from sys.summits`` is now
   possible

 - Upgraded Elasticsearch to 2.4.2.

 - Added scalar functions ``latitude`` and ``longitude`` to extract latitude
   and longitude of a ``geo_point``.

 - Improved performance of ``array_cat`` and ``array_difference`` scalar
   functions if the array contains function expressions.

 - New setting ``stats.service.interval`` which allows to control the refresh
   interval of the table statistics used to create optimal query execution
   plans.

 - Added support for global aggregations on subselects.

 - Added the ``-C`` option for providing CrateDB settings and deprecated usage
   of the ``.es`` prefix with ``-D`` option.

 - Added support for global aggregations on joins

 - Log unhandled HTTP related exceptions as ``debug`` instead of ``error``.

 - Implemented ``if`` conditional function.

 - F261/F262: Implemented ``CASE`` expression support.

 - Removed the duplicate ``rowcount`` field from the HTTP response.

 - Added the ``search_path`` session setting parameter. The default table
   schema can be set with ``SET SESSION search_path = schema_name``.

 - Updated crate-admin to 1.0.1 which includes the following changes:

    - Fixed an issue that caused incorrect URL paths if the project gets built.

    - Implemented new layout for the admin-ui.

    - Local development: do not store ``base_uri`` permanently in localStorage
      but keep it in URL.

    - Added Pepper contact widget which displays various Crate.io support
      Channels in a user friendly way.

    - The first node in the node list is selected by default.

    - The first table in the table list is selected by default.

    - Developer news from Crate.io website are now loaded correctly into
      newsfeed.

 - Updated Crash to 0.20.0 which includes the following change:

    - Updated information_schema metadata queries to reflect the current state
      of CrateDB.

Fixes
-----

 - Fixed issue in joins with 3 or more tables where limit was applied before
   ``WHERE`` clause filtering which produced  wrong results.

 - Fixed issue which causes ``BETWEEN`` to return a wrong result if ``min`` or
   ``max`` is null.

.. _migration script: https://github.com/crate/crate-utils/tree/master/migrations/pre-1.0
