.. _version_1.1.0:

=============
Version 1.1.0
=============

Released on 2017/03/21.

.. WARNING::

    Do not use this version. This release introduced a bug which caused all
    partitioned tables to become unusable. The bug was fixed in
    :ref:`version_1.1.1`.

    This version was removed from all release channels. This changelog is kept
    for information purposes only.

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Changelog
=========

Breaking Changes
----------------

 - Removed multicast discovery.

 - The ``ordinal`` column at the ``information_schema.columns`` will return
   ``NULL`` now for all sub-columns (all non top-level columns) as the order of
   object columns is not guarateed.

 - The ``TableFunctionImplementation`` interface was streamlined with other
   function implementation semantics. This requires function implementation
   plugins to be adapted to the new interface.

 - Removed deprecated setting ``indices.fielddata.breaker`` that have been used
   as an alias for ``indices.breaker.fielddata``.

Changes
-------

 - Serve admin UI from ``/``. Previously used URIs will direct to ``/``.

 - Added the subscript function support for object literals.

 - Added cluster checks that warn if some tables need to be recreated or
   upgraded for compatibility with future versions of CrateDB.

 - Added functionality to monitor query runtime statistics via JMX. This feature
   can only be used with an enterprise license.

 - Added a new parameter ``upgrade_segments`` to the ``OPTIMIZE`` statement
   which enables the upgrade of tables and tables partitions to the current
   version of the storage engine.

 - Added new column ``min_lucene_version`` to ``sys.shards`` table, which shows
   the oldest lucene segment version used in the shard.

 - Remove restriction to run ``OPTIMIZE`` on blob tables.

 - UDC: add the ``enterprise`` field to the ``UDC`` ping. The field identifies
   whether a user uses the enterprise version.

 - Added the ``license.enterprise`` setting to the cluster settings.

 - It is now supported to order and group by predicate functions in general
   with the exception of the ``match`` predicate.

 - Selecting ``os['timestamp'] from ``sys.nodes`` returns the actual timestamp
   of each node clock at the time of collecting the metric instead of the
   timestamp on the handler node.

 - Added scalar function ``geohash`` that returns a GeoHash representation of
   a ``geo_point``

 - Added support for casting JSON strings to object columns.

 - The array comparison no longer requires extra parentheses for subselects.
   Now it's possible to use `` = ANY (SELECT ...)`` instead of
   `` = ANY ((SELECT ...))``.

 - Allow semi-colon (``;``) in the end of simple SQL statements.

 - Enhanced performance optimisation of full joins by rewriting them to left,
   right or inner joins when conditions in ``WHERE`` exclude null values.

 - Added support for filtering and ordering on ``ignored`` object columns.

 - Added support for the double colon (``::``) cast operator.

 - Upgraded the parser from ANTLR3 to ANTLR4.

 - Added monitoring plugin for the Enterprise edition in the admin UI.

 - Added Lazy loading of the stylesheet and plugins depending on the
   Enterprise settings.

 - Added buttons to collapse and expand all schemas in the tables view.

 - The console now expands vertically to show the whole query if its size is
   larger than the standard size of the console.

 - SQL console keywords are now CrateDB specific.

 - Improved formatted results of the ``geo_area`` data type to include an
   external link to a visualisation of that ``geo_area``.

 - Keywords in the SQL console are capitalised.

 - Added node number to the status bar.

 - Relocated the help resources section to be underneath the tweet import
   tutorial.

 - Improved console results table, including data type based colorization,
   alternating row colorization, structured object/array formatting,
   human-readable timestamps, Google Maps link on geo-point results & lazy
   loading on result sets larger than 100 rows.

Fixes
-----

 - Fixed an issue that prevent a node from starting on Windows if the
   sigar-plugin is removed.

 - Fixed validation of known configuration file settings. The settings are also
   validated upon start-up.

 - Show loading indicator in the console interface when ``Execute Query`` is in
   progress.

 - Fixed issue that caused ``Cluster Offline`` message to not be displayed.

 - Fixed a console results issue that caused the results table not to be
   visible after horizontal scrolling.

 - Fixed styling issue that caused the last element in the side bar list to
   be hidden.

 - Fixed an issue that caused the notification date to be ``null`` in Safari.

 - Fixed a console results issue that caused the results table not to be
   displayed after horizontal scrolling.

 - Fixed an issue that caused the admin UI to load only one plugin.

 - Display warning in the console view when the query result contains an
   unsafe integer.
