.. _version_2.2.5:

=============
Version 2.2.5
=============

Released on 2017/12/14.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB
    :ref:`version_1.1.3` or higher before you upgrade to 2.2.5.

    If you want to perform a `rolling upgrade`_, your current CrateDB version
    number must be :ref:`version_2.2.0`.  If you want to upgrade from a version
    prior to this, the upgrade will introduce all of the breaking changes listed
    for :ref:`version_2.2.0`, and will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

.. WARNING::

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/rolling_upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/full_restart_upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/a/backing-up-and-restoring-crate/

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Changelog
=========

Fixes
-----

- Fixed an issue that caused an exception when trying to query the
  ``thread_pools['name']`` field of the ``sys.nodes`` table and the
  ``settings['write']['wait_for_active_shards']`` field of the
  ``information_schema.tables`` table.

- Removed the horizontal scroll from the console editor in the Admin UI.

- Reset the pagination of the console results in the Admin UI after each
  execution.

- Calculate "idle" process CPU usage correctly for the "CrateDB CPU Usage"
  graph in the Admin UI.

- Fixed an issue that caused the Admin UI to not display any tables when the
  file system data is not available.

- Refresh the cluster information after query execution in the console view of
  the Admin UI, to ensure that the cluster info is always up-to-date.

- Fixed an issue that caused incorrect results for collapsable subselects which
  contained a ``WHERE`` clause that resulted in no match. E.g.::

    SELECT * FROM (
      SELECT * FROM t
      WHERE false
    ) vt

- Fixed a performance regression introduced in ``2.2.0`` that caused ``SELECT``
  statements with ``ORDER BY`` and ``LIMIT`` to execute significantly slower
  than before.

- Fixed support for subscript expressions on the ``values`` column of
  ``information_schema.table_partitions``.
