.. _version_2.2.2:

=============
Version 2.2.2
=============

Released on 2017/11/08.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB
    :ref:`version_1.1.3` or higher before you upgrade to 2.2.2.

    If you want to perform a `rolling upgrade`_, your current CrateDB version
    number must be :ref:`version_2.2.0`.  If you want to upgrade from a version
    prior to this, the upgrade will introduce all of the breaking changes listed
    for :ref:`version_2.2.0`, and will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

.. WARNING::

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/rolling_upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/full_restart_upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/a/backing-up-and-restoring-crate/

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Changelog
=========

Fixes
-----

- Removed horizontal scroll from the console editor in the Admin UI.

- Fixed an issue that cause the status bar of the Admin UI to show an error if
  the user has an adblocker enabled.

- Fixed an issue that caused extra spaces to be added to the formatted console
  results in the Admin UI.

- Fixed Admin UI shard view to show all nodes, even those with no shards.

- Fixed issue that caused ``NULL`` values to be displayed as empty objects in
  the console view of the Admin UI.

- Fixed Tables view of the Admin UI to show messages when the table list is
  empty.

- Fixed an issue that prevented the complete graceful shutdown of CrateDB node.

- Fixed an issue that caused a ``NullPointerException`` for queries that use
  the ``IN`` or ``ANY`` operator on timestamp fields.

- Improves resiliency of ``COPY FROM`` and ``INSERT FROM SUBQUERY`` statements
  when lot of new partitions will be created.

- Fixed a ``NullPointerException`` which could occur when joining four tables
  with a join condition which referred to fields from the leftmost relation.

- Fixed a problem that caused ``WITHIN`` queries to return no or incorrect
  results.

- Fixed an issue where internal cluster state updates could reset the active
  ingestion rules, causing all ingest operations to stop.

- Fixed the problem that ``stats.breaker.*`` settings were not applied to the
  correct circuit breaker.

- Fixed an issue that caused an error ``Primary key value must not be NULL``
  to be thrown when trying to insert rows in a table that has a generated
  column which is used both in ``PARTITION_BY`` and ``PRIMARY KEY``.
