.. _version_2.3.7:

=============
Version 2.3.7
=============

Released on 2018/05/03.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB
    :ref:`version_1.1.3` or higher before you upgrade to 2.3.7.

    If you want to perform a `rolling upgrade`_, your current CrateDB version
    number must be at least :ref:`version_2.3.0`. Any upgrade from a version
    prior to this will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

.. WARNING::

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/rolling_upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/full_restart_upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/a/backing-up-and-restoring-crate/

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Changelog
=========

Changes
-------

- Table functions no longer require any permissions to be used. (Enterprise
  only.)

Fixes
-----

- Fixed an issue in binary encoding and decoding of array types in PostgreSQL
  wire protocol affecting the ``npgsql`` driver.

- As Microsoft Windows does not support sending signals, stop attempting to
  handle the ``USR2`` signal on Windows platforms as it pollutes the log with
  an unnecessary stacktrace.

- Fixed a performance regression which occurred in queries where a literal was
  compared against an array column of a different type. For example:
  ``SELECT * FROM t1 WHERE 1 = ANY(int_arr_column)``
  The array column would have been converted to long although the literal on
  the left could have been converted to integer.

- Fixed an issue where the order of the relations in a ``FROM`` clause would
  expose fields between the relations. An error was thrown during execution of
  the statements.

- Fixed incorrect HTTP responses on the BLOB API of subsequent requests after
  an error response occurred, e.g. 404 Not Found.

- Fixed an issue that caused ``ANY`` to not work correctly on nested arrays.

- Fixed an issue that would cause a ``NullPointerException`` to be thrown when
  executing an ``EXPLAIN`` statement for a ``CROSS JOIN``.
