.. _version_3.2.0:

=============
Version 3.2.0
=============

Released on 2018/12/19.

.. NOTE::

    If you are upgrading a cluster, you must be running CrateDB 2.0.4 or higher
    before you upgrade to 3.2.0.

    We recommend that you upgrade to the latest 3.1 release before moving to
    3.2.0.

    You cannot perform a `rolling upgrade`_ to this version. Any upgrade to this
    version will require a `full restart upgrade`_.

    When restarting, CrateDB will migrate indexes to a newer format. Depending
    on the amount of data, this may delay node start-up time.

    Please consult the :ref:`version_3.0.0_upgrade_notes` before upgrading.

.. WARNING::

    Tables that were created prior to upgrading to CrateDB 2.x will not
    function with 3.2 and must be recreated before moving to 3.2.x.

    You can recreate tables using ``COPY TO`` and ``COPY FROM`` while running a
    2.x release into a new table, or by `inserting the data into a new table`_.

    Before upgrading, you should `back up your data`_.

.. _rolling upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/rolling_upgrade.html
.. _full restart upgrade: http://crate.io/docs/crate/guide/best_practices/full_restart_upgrade.html
.. _back up your data: https://crate.io/a/backing-up-and-restoring-crate/
.. _inserting the data into a new table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/admin/system-information.html#tables-need-to-be-recreated


.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _version_3.2.0_upgrade_notes:

Upgrade Notes
=============

Logging Configuration Changes
-----------------------------

The default logging configuration for CrateDB in ``log4j2.properties`` has been
changed. If you have customised this `logging configuration <conf-logging-log4j>`_, 
you should replace the ``$marker`` entry with ``[%node_name] %marker``.

Deprecated Settings and Features
--------------------------------

In previous versions, the CrateDB license was set via the `license.ident`
configuration setting. This has now been deprecated, and going forward the
CrateDB license should be set using the :ref:`ref-set-license` statement.

The :ref:`ingest_mqtt` has been deprecated, and will be removed in the future.

The ``http.enabled`` setting has been deprecated, and will be removed in the
future.

The ``delimited_payload_filter`` built-in token filter for fulltext analyzers
has been renamed to ``delimited_payload``. The ``delimited_payload_filter`` name
can still be used, but is deprecated, and will be removed in the future.

Changelog
=========

Breaking Changes
----------------

- The ``*`` of ``SELECT *`` statements in the query clause of 
  :ref:`view definitions <views>`
  is no longer expanded at view creation time but lazy whenever a view is
  evaluated. That means columns added to a table after the views initial
  creation will show up in queries on the view. It is generally recommended to
  avoid using ``*`` in views but always specify columns explicitly.

Changes
-------

New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added support for executing existing aggregation functions as 
  :ref:`window functions <window-functions>` using the
  :ref:`OVER <over>` clause.

- Added support for CrateDB license management enabling users to 
  :ref:`trial <enterprise_trial>` the
  enterprise features, set a production enterprise license or continue
  using the community edition. Additionally, a new 
  :ref:`SET LICENSE <ref-set-license>` statement
  has been added for license registration, and the ``license.ident`` setting
  has become ``@deprecated``.

SQL Improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added the :ref:`REPLACE <scalar-replace>` scalar function replacing
  substrings in a string with another string.

- Added the 
  `GENERATE_SERIES(start, stop [, step ]) <table-functions-generate-series>`_ 
  table function which can generate a series of numbers.

- Implemented the :ref:`ARRAY_UPPER <scalar-array-upper>`,
  :ref:`ARRAY_LENGTH <scalar-array-length>` and
  :ref:`ARRAY_LOWER <scalar-array-lower>` scalars
  that return the upper and respectively lower bound of a given array
  dimension.

- Added support for the 
  `ARRAY(subquery) <sql_expressions_array_subquery>`_ expression,
  which can turn the result from a subquery into an array.

- The `= ANY <sql_dql_any_array>`_ operator now also supports 
  operations on object arrays or
  nested arrays. This enables queries like ``WHERE ['foo', 'bar'] =
  ANY(object_array(string_array))``.

- Added support for `SHOW parameter_name | ALL <ref-show>`_ to retrieve
  one or all session setting value(s).

- Added support for `INITCAP(string) <scalar-initcap>`_ which
  capitalizes the first letter of every word while turning all others into
  lowercase.

- Added the scalar expression 
  :ref:`CURRENT_DATABASE <scalar_current_database>` which returns the
  current database.

- Functions like :ref:`CURRENT_SCHEMA <scalar_current_schema>` and
  :ref:`CURRENT_USER <current_user>` which depend on the
  active session can now be used as 
  :ref:`generated columns <sql-ddl-generated-columns>`.

- Added support for using :ref:`table functions <ref-table-functions>` in the
  select list of a query.

- :ref:`geo_shape <geo_shape_data_type>` columns can now be casted to ``object``
  with ``cast`` in addition to ``try_cast``.

- Improved the handling of function expressions inside subscripts used on
  object columns. This allows expressions like ``obj['x' || 'x']`` to be used.

- ``<object_column> = <object_literal>`` comparisons now try to utilize the
  index for the objects contents and can therefore run much faster.

- Values of byte-size and time based configuration setting do not require a unit
  suffix anymore. Without a unit time values are treat as milliseconds since
  epoch and byte size values are treat as bytes.

- Added support of using units inside byte-size or time bases statement
  parameters values. E.g. '1mb' for 1 MegaByte or '1s' for 1 Second.

PostgreSQL Compatibility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added the `pg_catalog.pg_database <postgres_pg_catalog>`_ table.

- Added ``pg_class``, ``pg_namespace``, ``pg_attribute``, ``pg_attrdef``,
  ``pg_index`` and ``pg_constraint`` tables to the 
  :ref:`pg_catalog <postgres_pg_catalog>` schema for
  improved compatibility with PostgreSQL.

- Improved the compatibility with PostgreSQL clients that use the ``text`` type
  for parameter encoding.

- Changed PostgreSQL wire interface to emulate version ``10.5``.

- Added some type aliases for improved compatibility with PostgreSQL.

- Expand the :ref:`search_path <conf-session-search-path>` setting to
  accept a list of schemas that will be
  searched when a relation (table, view or user defined function) is referenced
  without specifying a schema. The system 
  :ref:`pg_catalog <postgres_pg_catalog>` schema is implicitly
  included as the first one in the path.

Database Administration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added support for changing the number of shards on an existing table or
  partition using the :ref:`ALTER TABLE SET <alter_table_set_reset>`
  statement.

- Improved resiliency of the :ref:`ALTER TABLE RENAME <alter_table_rename>`
  operation by making it an atomic operation.

- Added an :ref:`ALTER CLUSTER SWAP TABLE <alter_cluster_swap_table>`
  statement that can be used to switch the names of two tables.

- Added a :ref:`ALTER CLUSTER GC DANGLING ARTIFACTS <alter_cluster_gc_dangling_artifacts>`
  statement that can be used to
  clean up internal structures that weren't properly cleaned up due to cluster
  failures during operations which create such temporary artifacts.

- Added support for per-table 
  :ref:`shard allocation filtering <ddl_shard_allocation>`.

Admin UI Upgrade to 1.11.3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Changed the license information (ident) to be taken from the
  `sys.cluster.licence` attribute instead of the `license.ident` setting,
  which is ``@deprecated``.

- Addition of French language files and menu options.

- Fixed an issue that caused incorrectness in the navigation of the Admin UI.

- Updated the license container to be responsive in the Admin UI.

- Various other improvements.

Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- The :ref:`MQTT <ingest_mqtt>` endpoint has been deprecated and will be
  removed in a future version.

- Deprecated the ``http.enabled`` setting which will be always on in future.

Other
~~~~~

- Upgraded to Elasticsearch 6.5.1, which includes changes to the default logging
  configuration.

- Added a :ref:`remove_duplicates <analyzers_remove_duplicates>` token
  filter.

- Added a :ref:`char_group <analyzers_char_group>` tokenizer.

- Renamed the ``delimited_payload_filter`` token filter to
  :ref:`delimited_payload <delimited_payload-tokenfilter>`. The old name
  can still be used, but is deprecated.

For further information on CrateDB 3.2.0 see our
`announcement blogpost <blogpost>`_.

.. _blogpost: https://crate.io/a/cratedb-3-2-stable-available-now/
